# Anticipating Cryptocurrency Prices Using Machine Learning

- Source PDF: ./1805.08550.pdf
- arXiv URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.08550

## Full Extracted Content

## Page 1

Anticipating cryptocurrency prices
using machine learning
Laura Alessandretti a, Abeer ElBahrawy b, Luca Maria Aiello c, and
Andrea Baronchelli b,d,*
aTechnical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
bCity, University of London, Department of Mathematics, London EC1V 0HB, UK
cNokia Bell Labs, Cambridge CB3 0FA, UK
dUCL Centre for Blockchain Technologies, University College London, UK
*Corresponding author: Andrea.Baronchelli.1@city.ac.uk
March 6, 2019
Abstract
Machine learning and AI-assisted trading have attracted growing interest for the past few years.
Here, we use this approach to test the hypothesis that the ineﬃciency of the cryptocurrency market
can be exploited to generate abnormal proﬁts. We analyse daily data for 1 , 681 cryptocurrencies
for the period between Nov. 2015 and Apr. 2018. We show that simple trading strategies assisted
by state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms outperform standard benchmarks. Our results show
that non-trivial, but ultimately simple, algorithmic mechanisms can help anticipate the short-term
evolution of the cryptocurrency market.
Introduction
The popularity of cryptocurrencies has skyrocketed in 2017 due to several consecutive months of super-
exponential growth of their market capitalisation [1], which peaked at more than $800 billions in Jan.
2018. Today, there are more than 1 , 500 actively traded cryptocurrencies. Between 2 .9 and 5 .8 millions
of private as well as institutional investors are in the diﬀerent transaction networks, according to a
recent survey [2], and access to the market has become easier over time. Major cryptocurrencies can be
bought using ﬁat currency in a number of online exchanges (e.g., Binance [3], Upbit [4], Kraken [5], etc)
and then be used in their turn to buy less popular cryptocurrencies. The volume of daily exchanges is
currently superior to $15 billions. Since 2017, over 170 hedge funds specialised in cryptocurrencies have
emerged and bitcoin futures have been launched to address institutional demand for trading and hedging
Bitcoin [6].
The market is diverse and provides investors with many diﬀerent products. Just to mention a few,
Bitcoin was expressly designed as a medium of exchange [7, 8]; Dash oﬀers improved services on top
of Bitcoin’s feature set, including instantaneous and private transactions [9]; Ethereum is a public,
blockchain-based distributed computing platform featuring smart contract (scripting) functionality, and
1
arXiv:1805.08550v4 [physics.soc-ph] 9 Nov 2018

## Page 2

Ether is a cryptocurrency whose blockchain is generated by the Ethereum platform [10]; Ripple is a
real-time gross settlement system (RTGS), currency exchange and remittance network Ripple [11], and
IOTA is focused on providing secure communications and payments between agents on the Internet of
Things [12].
The emergence of a self-organised market of virtual currencies and/or assets whose value is generated
primarily by social consensus [13] has naturally attracted interest from the scientiﬁc community [8,14–30].
Recent results have shown that the long-term properties of the cryptocurrency marked have remained
stable between 2013 and 2017 and are compatible with a scenario in which investors simply sample the
market and allocate their money according to the cryptocurrency’s market shares [1]. While this is
true on average, various studies have focused on the analysis and forecasting of price ﬂuctuations, using
mostly traditional approaches for ﬁnancial markets analysis and prediction [31–35].
The success of machine learning techniques for stock markets prediction [36–42], suggests that these
methods could be eﬀective also in predicting cryptocurrencies prices. However, the application of machine
learning algorithms to the cryptocurrency market has been limited so far to the analysis of Bitcoin prices,
using random forests [43], Bayesian neural network [44], long short-term memory neural network [45]
and other algorithms [32, 46]. These studies were able to anticipate, to diﬀerent degrees, the price
ﬂuctuations of Bitcoin, and revealed that best results were achieved by neural network based algorithms.
Deep reinforcement learning was showed to beat the uniform buy and hold strategy [47] in predicting
the prices of 12 cryptocurrencies over one year period [48].
Other attempts to use machine learning to predict the prices of cryptocurrencies other than Bit-
coin come from non-academic sources [49–54]. Most of these analyses focused on a limited number of
currencies and did not provide benchmark comparisons for their results.
Here, we test the performance of three models in predicting daily cryptocurrency price for 1,681
currencies. Two of the models are based on gradient boosting decision trees [55] and one is based on long
short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural networks [56]. In all cases, we build investment portfolios
based on the predictions and we compare their performance in terms of return on investment. We ﬁnd
that all of the three models perform better than a baseline ‘simple moving average’ model [57–60] where
a currency’s price is predicted as the average price across the preceding days, and that the method
based on long short-term memory recurrent neural networks systematically yields the best return on
investment.
The article is structured as follows: In section Materials and Methods we describe the data (see Data
description and pre-processing), the metrics characterizing cryptocurrencies that are used along the paper
(see Metrics), the forecasting algorithms (see Forecasting algorithms), and the evaluation metrics (see
Evaluation). In section Results, we present and compare the results obtained with the three forecasting
algorithms and the baseline method. In section Conclusion, we conclude and discuss results.
Materials and Methods
Data description and pre-processing
Cryptocurrency data was extracted from the website Coin Market Cap [61], collecting daily data from
300 exchange markets platforms starting in the period between November 11, 2015 and April 24, 2018.
The dataset contains the daily price in U.S. dollars, the market capitalisation and the trading volume
of 1, 681 cryptocurrencies, where the market capitalization is the product between price and circulating
supply, and the volume is the number of coins exchanged in a day. The daily price is computed as the
2

## Page 3

volume weighted average of all prices reported at each market. Fig. 1 shows the number of currencies
with trading volume larger than Vmin over time, for diﬀerent values of Vmin. In the following sections,
we consider that only currencies with daily trading volume higher than 10 5 USD can be traded at any
given day.
The website lists cryptocurrencies traded on public exchange markets that have existed for more than
30 days and for which an API as well as a public URL showing the total mined supply are available.
Information on the market capitalization of cryptocurrencies that are not traded in the 6 hours preceding
the weekly release of data is not included on the website. Cryptocurrencies inactive for 7 days are not
included in the list released. These measures imply that some cryptocurrencies can disappear from the
list to reappear later on. In this case, we consider the price to be the same as before disappearing.
However, this choice does not aﬀect results since only in 28 cases the currency has volume higher than
105 USD right before disappearing (note that there are 124,328 entries in the dataset with volume larger
than 105 USD).
Jan 16 May 16 Sep 16 Jan 17 May 17 Sep 17 Jan 18
100
101
102
103
cryptocurrenciesVmin = $0 Vmin = $1000 Vmin = $10000 Vmin = $100000
Figure 1: Number of cryptocurrencies. The cryptocurrencies with volume higher than Vmin as a
function of time, for diﬀerent values of Vmin. For visualization purposes, curves are averaged over a
rolling window of 10 days.
Metrics
Cryptocurrencies are characterised over time by several metrics, namely
• Price, The exchange rate, determined by supply and demand dynamics.
• Market capitalization, The product of the circulating supply and the price.
• Market share, The market capitalization of a currency normalized by the total market capitaliza-
tion.
• Rank, The rank of currency based on its market capitalization.
• Volume, Coins traded in the last 24 hours.
• Age, Lifetime of the currency in days.
The proﬁtability of a currency c over time can be quantiﬁed through the return on investment (ROI),
measuring the return of an investment made at day ti relative to the cost [62]. The index i rolls across
days and it is included between 0 and 844, with t0 = January 1, 2016, and t844 = April 24, 2018. Since
3

## Page 4

we are interested in the short-term performance, we consider the return on investment after 1 day deﬁned
as
ROI(c, ti) = price(c, ti)− price(c, ti− 1)
price(c, ti− 1) . (1)
In Fig. 2, we show the evolution of the ROI over time for Bitcoin (orange line) and on average for
currencies whose volume is larger than Vmin = 105 USD at ti− 1 (blue line). In both case, the average
return on investment over the period considered is larger than 0, reﬂecting the overall growth of the
market.
Jan 16 May 16 Sep 16 Jan 17 May 17 Sep 17 Jan 18
day
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
roi
cryptos with volume>105
mean=0.011
Bitcoin
mean=0.005
Figure 2: Return on investment over time. The daily return on investment for Bitcoin (orange line)
and the average for currencies with volume larger than Vmin = 105 USD (blue line). Their average value
across time (dashed lines) is larger than 0. For visualization purposes, curves are averaged over a rolling
window of 10 days.
Forecasting algorithms
We test and compare three supervised methods for short-term price forecasting. The ﬁrst two methods
rely on XGboost [63], an open-source scalable machine learning system for tree boosting used in a
number of winning Kaggle solutions (17/29 in 2015) [64]. The third method is based on the long short-
term memory (LSTM) algorithm for recurrent neural networks [56] that have demonstrated to achieve
state-of-the-art results in time-series forecasting [65].
Method 1: The ﬁrst method considers one single regression model to describe the change in price of
all currencies (see Fig. 3). The model is an ensemble of regression trees built by the XGboost algorithm.
The features of the model are characteristics of a currency between time tj− w and tj− 1 and the target
is the ROI of the currency at time tj, where w is a parameter to be determined. The characteristics
considered for each currency are: price, market capitalization, market share, rank, volume and ROI (see
equation Eq. (1)). The features for the regression are built across the window between tj− w and tj− 1
included (see Fig. 3). Speciﬁcally, we consider the average, the standard deviation, the median, the last
value and the trend (e.g. the diﬀerence between last and ﬁrst value) of the properties listed above. In the
training phase, we include all currencies with volume larger than 10 5 USD, and tj between ti− Wtraining
and ti. In general, larger training windows do not necessarily lead to better results (see results section),
because the market evolves across time. In the prediction phase, we test on the set of existing currencies
at day ti. This procedure is repeated for values of ti included between January 1, 2016 and April 24,
2018.
Method 2: Also the second method relies on XGboost, but now the algorithm is used to build a
diﬀerent regression model for each currency ci (see Fig. 4). The features of the model for currency ci are
4

## Page 5

ti Wtraining
 ti Wtraining + 1
 tj ti 1
 ti
C1
Cj
CN
Features T Features T Features T Features T
Features T Features T Features T Features T
Features T
w
Features T
w
Features T
w
Features T
w
Training Test
Figure 3: Schematic description of Method 1. The training set is composed of features and tar-
get (T) pairs, where features are various characteristics of a currency ci, computed across the w days
preceding time tj and the target T is the price of ci at tj. The features-target pairs are computed for
all currencies ci and all values of tj included between ti− Wtraining and ti− 1. The test set includes
features-target pairs for all currencies with trading volume larger than 10 5 USD at ti, where the target
is the price at time ti and features are computed in the w days preceding ti.
ti Wtraining
 ti Wtraining + 1
 tj ti 1
 ti
C1
Cj
CN
Features Features Features Features
TFeatures TFeatures TFeatures TFeatures
Features
w
Features
w
Features
w
Features
w
Training Test
Figure 4: Schematic description of Method 2. The training set is composed of features and tar-
get (T) pairs, where features are various characteristics of all currencies, computed across the w days
preceding time tj and the target T is the price of ci at tj. The features-target pairs include a single
currency ci, for all values of tj included between ti− Wtraining and ti− 1. The test set contains a single
features-target pair: the characteristics of all currencies, computed across the w days preceding time ti
and the price of ci at ti.
the characteristics of all the currencies in the dataset between tj− w and tj− 1 included and the target
is the ROI of ci at day tj(i.e., now the algorithm learns to predict the price of the currency i based on
the features of all the currencies in the system between tj− w and tj− 1). The features of the model are
the same used in Method 1 (e.g. the average, standard, deviation, median, last value, diﬀerence between
last and ﬁrst value of the following quantities: price, market capitalisation, market share, rank, volume
and ROI) across a window of length w. The model for currency ci is trained with pairs features target
between times ti− Wtraining and ti−1. The prediction set include only one pair: the features (computed
between ti− w and ti− 1) and the target (computed at ti) of currency ci.
Method 3: The third method is based on Long Short Term Memory networks, a special kind of
Recurrent Neural Networks, capable of learning long-term dependencies. As for Method 2, we build a
diﬀerent model for each currency. Each model predicts the ROI of a given currency at day ti based on
the values of the ROI of the same currency between days ti− w and ti− 1 included.
5

## Page 6

Baseline method: As baseline method, we adopt the simple moving average strategy (SMA) widely
tested and used as a null model in stock market prediction [57–60]. It estimates the price of a currency
at day ti as the average price of the same currency between ti− w and ti− 1 included.
Evaluation
We compare the performance of various investment portfolios built based on the algorithms predictions.
The investment portfolio is built at time ti− 1 by equally splitting an initial capital among the top n
currencies predicted with positive return. Hence, the total return at time ti is:
R(ti) = 1
n
n∑
c=1
ROI(c, ti).
The portfolios performance is evaluated by computing the Sharpe ratio and the geometric mean return.
The Sharpe ratio is deﬁned as:
S(ti) = R
sR
,
where R is the average return on investment obtained between times 0 and ti, and sR, the corresponding
standard deviation.
The geometric mean return is deﬁned as:
G(ti) = T
√
ti∏
tj =1
1 + R(tj),
where ti corresponds to the total number of days considered. The cumulative return obtained at ti after
investing and selling on the following day for the whole period is deﬁned as G(ti)2.
The number of currencies n to include in a portfolio is chosen at ti by optimising either the geometric
mean G(ti− 1) (geometric mean optimisation) or the Sharpe ratio S(ti− 1) (Sharpe ratio optimisation)
over the possible choices of n. The same approach is used to choose the parameters of Method 1 ( w and
Wtraining), Method 2 ( w and Wtraining), and the baseline method ( w).
Results
We predict the price of the currencies at day ti, for all ti included between Jan, 1st 2016 and Apr 24th,
2018. The analysis considers all currencies whose age is larger than 50 days since their ﬁrst appearance
and whose volume is larger than $100000. To discount for the eﬀect of the overall market movement
(i.e., market growth, for most of the considered period), we consider cryptocurrencies prices expressed
in Bitcoin. This implies that Bitcoin is excluded from our analysis.
Parameter setting
First, we choose the parameters for each method. Parameters include the number of currencies n to
include the portfolio as well as the parameters speciﬁc to each method. In most cases, at each day ti we
choose the parameters that maximise either the geometric mean G(ti−1) (geometric mean optimisation)
or the Sharpe ratio S(ti− 1) (Sharpe ratio optimisation) computed between times 0 and ti.
6

## Page 7

Baseline strategy: We test the performance of the baseline strategy for choices of window w≥ 2
(the minimal requirement for the ROI to be diﬀerent from 0) and w < 30. We ﬁnd that the value of w
mazimising the geometric mean return (see Appendix Fig. A1-A) and the Sharpe Ratio (see Appendix
Fig. A1-D) ﬂuctuates especially before November 2016 and has median value 4 in both cases. The
number of currencies included in the portfolio oscillates between 1 and 11 with median at 3, both for
the Sharpe Ratio (see Fig. A1-B) and the geometric mean return (see Fig. A1-E) optimisation.
Method 1: We explore values of the window w in{3, 5, 7, 10} days and the training period Wtraining
in{5, 10, 20} days (see Appendix Fig. A2). We ﬁnd that the median value of the selected window w
across time is 7 for both the Sharpe ratio and the geometric mean optimisation. The median value of
Wtraining is 5 under geometric mean optimisation and 10 under Sharpe ratio optimisation. The number
of currencies included in the portfolio oscillates between 1 and 43 with median at 15 for the Sharpe Ratio
(see Appendix Fig. A2-A) and 9 for the geometric mean return (see Appendix Fig. A2-C) optimisations.
Method 2: We explore values of the window w in{3, 5, 7, 10} days and the training period Wtraining
in{5, 10, 20} days (see Appendix Fig. A3). The median value of the selected window w across time is
3 for both the Sharpe ratio and the geometric mean optimisation. The median value of Wtraining is 10
under geometric mean and Sharpe ratio optimisation. The number of currencies included has median at
17 for the Sharpe Ratio and 7 for the geometric mean optimisation (see Appendix Fig. A3-A and C).
Method 3: The LSTM has three parameters: The number of epochs, or complete passes through
the dataset during the training phase; the number of neurons in the neural network, and the length
of the window w. These parameters are chosen by optimising the price prediction of three currencies
(Bitcoin, Ripple, and Ethereum) that have on average the largest market share across time (excluding
Bitcoin Cash that is a fork of Bitcoin). Results (see SI, Fig. A4) reveal that, in the range of parameters
explored, the best results are achieved for w = 50. Results are not particularly aﬀected by the choice
of the number of neurones nor the number of epochs. We choose 1 neuron and 1000 epochs since the
larger these two parameters, the larger the computational time. The number of currencies to include in
the portfolio is optimised over time by mazimising the geometric mean return (see Appendix Fig. A5-A)
and the Sharpe ratio (see Appendix Fig. A5-B). In both cases the median number of currencies included
is 1.
Cumulative return
In Fig. 5, we show the cumulative return obtained using the 4 methods. The cumulative returns achieved
on April,24 under the Sharpe Ratio optimisation are ∼ 65 BTC (Baseline),∼ 1.1· 103 BTC (Method 1),
∼ 95 BTC (Method 2),∼ 1.2·109 BTC (Method 3). Under geometric mean optimisation we obtain∼ 25
BTC (Baseline),∼ 19· 103 BTC (Method 1),∼ 1.25 BTC (Method 2),∼ 3.6· 108 BTC (Method 3). The
cumulative returns obtained in USD are higher (see Fig. A9). This is expected, since the Bitcoin price
has increased during the period considered. While some of these ﬁgures appear exaggerated, it is worth
noticing that (i) we run a theoretical exercise assuming that the availability of Bitcoin is not limited and
(ii) under this assumption the upper bound to our strategy, corresponding to investing every day in the
most performing currency results in a total cumulative return of 6 · 10123 BTC (see Appendix Fig. A6).
We consider also the more realistic scenario of investors paying a transaction fee when selling and buying
currencies (see Appendix Section A3). In most exchange markets, the fee is typically included between
0.1% and 0 .5% of the traded amount [66]. For fees up to 0 .2%, all the investment methods presented
above lead, on average, to positive returns over the entire period (see Table A1). The best performing
method, Method 3, achieves positive gains also when fees up to 1% are considered (see Table A1).
7

## Page 8

May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
100
103
106
109
cumulative returnA
geometric mean optimization
Baseline
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
100
103
106
109
cumulative returnB
Sharpe ratio optimization
Baseline
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3
Figure 5: Cumulative returns. The cumulative returns obtained under the Sharpe Ratio optimisation
(A) and the geometric mean optimisation (B) for the baseline (blue line), Method 1 (orange line), Method
2 (green line) and Method 3 (red line). Analyses are performed considering prices in BTC.
The cumulative return in Fig. 5 is obtained by investing between January 1st, 2016 and April 24th,
2018. We investigate the overall performance of the various methods by looking at the geometric mean
return obtained in diﬀerent periods (see Fig. 6). Results presented in Fig. 6 are obtained under Sharpe
ratio optimisation for the baseline (Fig. 6-A), Method 1 (Fig. 6-B), Method 2 (Fig. 6-C), and Method 3
(Fig. 6-D). Note that, while in this case the investment can start after January 1st, 2016, we optimised
the parameters by using data from that date on in all cases. Results are considerably better than those
achieved using geometric mean return optimisation (see Appendix Fig. A10). Finally, we observe that
better performance is achieved when the algorithms consider prices in Bitcoin rather than USD (see
Table A2).
8

## Page 9

03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
end
BaselineA
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
end
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
start
Method 1B
Method 2C
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
start
Method 3D
-1 -0.1 -0.01 0 0.01 0.1 1
G-1
Figure 6: Geometric mean return obtained within diﬀerent periods of time. The geometric
mean return computed between time ”start” and ”end” using the Sharpe ratio optimisation for the
baseline (A), Method 1 (B), Method 2 (C) and Method 3 (D). Note that, for visualization purposes,
the ﬁgure shows the translated geometric mean return G-1. Shades of red refers to negative returns and
shades of blue to positive ones (see colour bar).
Feature importance
In Fig. 7, we illustrate the relative importance of the various features in Method 1 and Method 2.
For Method 1, we show the average feature importance; For Method 2, we show the average feature
importances for two sample currencies: Ethereum and Ripple.
9

## Page 10

price, mean
ROI, last
ROI, mean
ROI, trend
age, last
ROI, std
volume, mean
price, trend
price, std
volume, last
volume, trend
volume, std
rank, std
rank, trend
price, last
market share, trend
rank, mean
market share, std
market cap, trend
market cap, std
rank, last
market share, mean
market share, last
market cap, last
market cap, mean
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10feature importance
A
price, mean, Dash 
price, mean, Augur
price, mean, BitShares
price, mean, Ardor 
price, mean, 0x
price, mean, Ethereum
price, mean, Dogecoin 
price, mean, Ethereum Classic
price, mean, Factom
price, mean, Litecoin
price, mean, ATBCoin
price, mean, MaidSafeCoin 
price, mean, Aragon
price, mean, AdEx
price, mean, Achain
price, std, Ethereum
price, mean, E-Dinar Coin
price, last, Ethereum
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05feature importance
B
Ethereum
price, mean, Dash 
price, mean, Augur
price, mean, BitShares
price, mean, 0x
price, mean, Dogecoin 
price, mean, Ardor 
price, mean, Ethereum
price, mean, EDRCoin 
price, mean, Factom
price, mean, Ark
price, mean, MaidSafeCoin 
price, mean, AdEx
price, mean, E-Dinar Coin
price, mean, Aragon
price, mean, Litecoin
price, mean, ATBCoin
price, mean, Ethereum Classic
price, std, Dash 
feature importance
C
Ripple
Figure 7: Feature importance for Methods 1 and 2. (A) The average importance of each feature
for the XGBoost regression model of Method 1. Results are shown for w = 7 and Wtraining = 10.
(B,C) Examples of average feature importance for the XGBoost regression model developed in Method
2. Results are shown for w = 3, Wtraining = 10, for Ethereum (B) and Ripple (C). For visualization
purposes, we show only the top features.
Portfolio composition
The 10 most selected currencies under Sharpe Ratio optimisation are the following:
Baseline: Factom (91 days), E-Dinar Coin (89 days), Ripple (76 days), Ethereum (71 days), Steem
(70 days), Lisk (70 days), MaidSafeCoin (69 days), Monero (58 days), BitShares (55 days), EDRCoin
(52 days).
Method 1: Ethereum (154 days), Dash (128 days), Monero (111 days), Factom (104 days), Ripple
(94 days), Litecoin (93 days), Dogecoin (92 days), Maid Safe Coin (86 days), BitShares (73 days), Tether
(59 days)
Method 2: Ethereum (63 days), Monero (61 days), Factom (51 days), Ripple (42 days), Dash (40
days), Maid Safe Coin (40 days), Siacoin (30 days), NEM (26 days), NXT (26 days), Steem (23 days).
Method 3: Factom (48 days), Monero (46 days), Ethereum (39 days), Lisk (36 days), Maid Safe Coin
10

## Page 11

(32 days), E-Dinar Coin (32 days), BitShares (26 days), B3 Coin (26 days), Dash (25 days), Cryptonite
(22 days).
Conclusion
We tested the performance of three forecasting models on daily cryptocurrency prices for 1, 681 currencies.
Two of them (Method 1 and Method 2) were based on gradient boosting decision trees and one is based
on long short-term memory recurrent neural networks (Method 3). In Method 1, the same model was
used to predict the return on investment of all currencies; in Method 2, we built a diﬀerent model for
each currency, that uses information on the behaviour of the whole market to make a prediction on that
single currency; in Method 3, we used a diﬀerent model for each currency, where the prediction is based
on previous prices of the currency.
We built investment portfolios based on the predictions of the diﬀerent method and compared their
performance with that of a baseline represented by the well known simple moving average strategy. The
parameters of each model were optimised for all but Method 3 on a daily basis, based on the outcome
of each parameters choice in previous times. We used two evaluation metrics used for parameter opti-
misation: The geometric mean return and the Sharpe ratio. To discount the eﬀect of the overall market
growth, cryptocurrencies prices were expressed in Bitcoin. All strategies, produced proﬁt (expressed
in Bitcoin) over the entire considered period and for a large set of shorter trading periods (diﬀerent
combinations of start and end dates for the trading activity), also when transaction fees up to 0 .2% are
considered.
The three methods performed better than the baseline strategy when the investment strategy was ran
over the whole period considered. The optimisation of parameters based on the Sharpe ratio achieved
larger returns. Methods based on gradient boosting decision trees (Method 1 and 2) worked best when
predictions were based on short-term windows of 5/10 days, suggesting they exploit well mostly short-
term dependencies. Instead, LSTM recurrent neural networks worked best when predictions were based
on∼ 50 days of data, since they are able to capture also long-term dependencies and are very stable
against price volatility. They allowed to make proﬁt also if transaction fees up to 1% are considered.
Methods based on gradient boosting decision trees allow to better interpret results. We found that the
prices and the returns of a currency in the last few days preceding the prediction were leading factors
to anticipate its behaviour. Among the two methods based on random forests, the one considering a
diﬀerent model for each currency performed best (Method 2). Finally, it is worth noting that the three
methods proposed perform better when predictions are based on prices in Bitcoin rather than prices
in USD. This suggests that forecasting simultaneously the overall cryptocurrency market trend and the
developments of individual currencies is more challenging than forecasting the latter alone.
It is important to stress that our study has limitations. First, we did not attempt to exploit the
existence of diﬀerent prices on diﬀerent exchanges, the consideration of which could open the way to sig-
niﬁcantly higher returns on investment. Second, we ignored intra-day price ﬂuctuations and considered
an average daily price. Finally, and crucially, we run a theoretical test in which the available supply
of Bitcoin is unlimited and none of our trades inﬂuence the market. Notwithstanding these simplifying
assumptions, the methods we presented were systematically and consistently able to identify outperform-
ing currencies. Extending the current analysis by considering these and other elements of the market is
a direction for future work.
A diﬀerent yet promising approach to the study cryptocurrencies consists in quantifying the impact
11

## Page 12

of public opinion, as measured through social media traces, on the market behaviour, in the same spirit
in which this was done for the stock market [67]. While it was shown that social media traces can be
also eﬀective predictors of Bitcoin [68–74] and other currencies [75] price ﬂuctuations, our knowledge of
their eﬀects on the whole cryptocurrency market remain limited and is an interesting direction for future
work.
References
[1] A. ElBahrawy, L. Alessandretti, A. Kandler, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Baronchelli, “Evolutionary
dynamics of the cryptocurrency market,” Royal Society Open Science, vol. 4, no. 11, 2017. [Online].
Available: http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/4/11/170623
[2] G. Hileman and M. Rauchs, Global Cryptocurrency Benchmarking Study . Cambridge Centre for
Alternative Finance, 2017.
[3] Binance.com. (2017) Binance. [Online]. Available: https://www.binance.com/
[4] Dunamu. (2017) Upbit. [Online]. Available: https://upbit.com/
[5] P. Inc. (2012) Kraken. [Online]. Available: https://www.kraken.com/
[6] S. Foley, J. Karlsen, and T. J. Putni, “Sex, drugs, and bitcoin: How much illegal activity is ﬁnanced
through cryptocurrencies?” SSRN, p. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3102645, 2018.
[7] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” 2008.
[8] R. Ali, J. Barrdear, R. Clews, and J. Southgate, “The economics of digital currencies,” 2014.
[9] The Dash Network. (2018) Dash. [Online]. Available: https://www.dash.org
[10] Ethereum Foundation (Stiftung Ethereum). (2018) Ethereum. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.ethereum.org/
[11] Ripple. (2013) Ripple. [Online]. Available: https://ripple.com/
[12] (2018) Iota. [Online]. Available: https://iota.org/
[13] A. Baronchelli, “The emergence of consensus: a primer,” Royal Society Open Science, vol. 5, no. 2,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/5/2/172189
[14] G. P. Dwyer, “The economics of bitcoin and similar private digital currencies,” Journal of Financial
Stability, vol. 17, pp. 81–91, 2015.
[15] R. B¨ ohme, N. Christin, B. Edelman, and T. Moore, “Bitcoin: Economics, technology, and gover-
nance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 213–38, 2015.
[16] M. J. Casey and P. Vigna, “Bitcoin and the digital-currency revolution,” The Wall Street Journal ,
vol. 23, 2015.
[17] S. Trimborn and W. K. H¨ ardle, “Crix an index for blockchain based currencies,” 2016.
[18] M. Iwamura, Y. Kitamura, and T. Matsumoto, “Is bitcoin the only cryptocurrency in the town?
economics of cryptocurrency and friedrich a. hayek,” 2014.
12

## Page 13

[19] M. A. Cusumano, “The bitcoin ecosystem,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 22–24,
2014.
[20] K. Wu, S. Wheatley, and D. Sornette, “Classiﬁcation of crypto-coins and tokens from the dynamics
of their power law capitalisation distributions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03088 , 2018.
[21] A. Lamarche-Perrin, A. Orl´ ean, and P. Jensen, “Coexistence of several currencies in presence of
increasing returns to adoption,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications , 2018.
[22] P. M. Kraﬀt, N. Della Penna, and A. Pentland, “An experimental study of cryptocurrency market
dynamics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05831 , 2018.
[23] A. Rogojanu, L. Badea et al., “The issue of competing currencies. case study–bitcoin,” Theoretical
and Applied Economics, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 103–114, 2014.
[24] L. H. White, “The market for cryptocurrencies,” Cato J., vol. 35, p. 383, 2015.
[25] P. Ceruleo, “Bitcoin: a rival to ﬁat money or a speculative ﬁnancial asset?” 2014.
[26] M. N. Sayed and N. A. Abbas, “Impact of crypto-currency on emerging market focus on gulf
countries,” Life Science Journal , vol. 15, no. 1, 2018.
[27] M. A. Javarone and C. S. Wright, “From bitcoin to bitcoin cash: a network analysis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.02350, 2018.
[28] Y. Sovbetov, “Factors inﬂuencing cryptocurrency prices: Evidence from bitcoin, ethereum, dash,
litcoin, and monero,” 2018.
[29] F. Parino, L. Gauvin, and M. G. Beiro, “Analysis of the bitcoin blockchain: Socio-economic factors
behind the adoption,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07657 , 2018.
[30] S. Beguˇ si´ c, Z. Kostanjˇ car, H. E. Stanley, and B. Podobnik, “Scaling properties of extreme price
ﬂuctuations in bitcoin markets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08405 , 2018.
[31] P. Ciaian, M. Rajcaniova, and d. Kancs, “The economics of bitcoin price formation,” Applied Eco-
nomics, vol. 48, no. 19, pp. 1799–1815, 2016.
[32] T. Guo and N. Antulov-Fantulin, “Predicting short-term bitcoin price ﬂuctuations from buy and
sell orders,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04065 , 2018.
[33] G. Gajardo, W. D. Kristjanpoller, and M. Minutolo, “Does bitcoin exhibit the same asymmetric
multifractal cross-correlations with crude oil, gold and djia as the euro, great british pound and
yen?” Chaos, Solitons & Fractals , vol. 109, pp. 195–205, 2018.
[34] N. Gandal and H. Halaburda, “Can we predict the winner in a market with network eﬀects? com-
petition in cryptocurrency market,” Games, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 16, 2016.
[35] H. Elendner, S. Trimborn, B. Ong, T. M. Lee et al. , “The cross-section of crypto-currencies as ﬁ-
nancial assets: An overview,” Sonderforschungsbereich 649, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany,
Tech. Rep., 2016.
[36] D. Enke and S. Thawornwong, “The use of data mining and neural networks for forecasting stock
market returns,” Expert Systems with applications , vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 927–940, 2005.
13

## Page 14

[37] W. Huang, Y. Nakamori, and S.-Y. Wang, “Forecasting stock market movement direction with
support vector machine,” Computers & Operations Research, vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 2513–2522, 2005.
[38] P. Ou and H. Wang, “Prediction of stock market index movement by ten data mining techniques,”
Modern Applied Science, vol. 3, no. 12, p. 28, 2009.
[39] M. Gavrilov, D. Anguelov, P. Indyk, and R. Motwani, “Mining the stock market (extended abstract):
which measure is best?” in Proceedings of the sixth ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining . ACM, 2000, pp. 487–496.
[40] K. S. Kannan, P. S. Sekar, M. M. Sathik, and P. Arumugam, “Financial stock market forecast
using data mining techniques,” in Proceedings of the International Multiconference of Engineers
and computer scientists , vol. 1, 2010, p. 4.
[41] A. F. Sheta, S. E. M. Ahmed, and H. Faris, “A comparison between regression, artiﬁcial neural
networks and support vector machines for predicting stock market index,” Soft Computing, vol. 7,
p. 8, 2015.
[42] P.-C. Chang, C.-H. Liu, C.-Y. Fan, J.-L. Lin, and C.-M. Lai, “An ensemble of neural networks for
stock trading decision making,” Emerging Intelligent Computing Technology and Applications. With
Aspects of Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp. 1–10, 2009.
[43] I. Madan, S. Saluja, and A. Zhao, “Automated bitcoin trading via machine learning algorithms,”
2015.
[44] H. Jang and J. Lee, “An empirical study on modeling and prediction of bitcoin prices with bayesian
neural networks based on blockchain information,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 5427–5437, 2018.
[45] S. McNally, “Predicting the price of bitcoin using machine learning,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dublin,
National College of Ireland, 2016.
[46] K. HEGAZY and S. MUMFORD, “Comparitive automated bitcoin trading strategies.”
[47] A. G. Shilling, “Market timing: Better than a buy-and-hold strategy,” Financial Analysts Journal ,
vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 46–50, 1992.
[48] Z. Jiang and J. Liang, “Cryptocurrency portfolio management with deep reinforcement learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.01277 , 2016.
[49] “Traderobot package,” https://github.com/owocki/pytrader, 2017, accessed: 5 December 2017.
[50] “Cryptobot package,” https://github.com/AdeelMufti/CryptoBot, 2017, accessed: 5 December
2017.
[51] “Cryptocurrencytrader package,” https://github.com/llens/CryptoCurrencyTrader, 2017, accessed:
5 December 2017.
[52] “Btctrading package,” https://github.com/bukosabino/btctrading, 2017, accessed: 5 December
2017.
[53] “Bitpredict package,” https://github.com/cbyn/bitpredict, 2017, accessed: 5 December 2017.
[54] “Bitcoin bubble burst,” https://bitcoinbubbleburst.github.io/, 2017, accessed: 5 December 2017.
14

## Page 15

[55] J. H. Friedman, “Stochastic gradient boosting,” Computational Statistics & Data Analysis , vol. 38,
no. 4, pp. 367–378, 2002.
[56] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural computation, vol. 9, no. 8,
pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[57] W. Brock, J. Lakonishok, and B. LeBaron, “Simple technical trading rules and the stochastic prop-
erties of stock returns,” The Journal of ﬁnance , vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 1731–1764, 1992.
[58] T. Kilgallen, “Testing the simple moving average across commodities, global stock indices, and
currencies,” The Journal of Wealth Management , vol. 15, no. 1, p. 82, 2012.
[59] B. LeBaron, “The stability of moving average technical trading rules on the dow jones index,”Deriv.
Use Trad. Regul, vol. 5, pp. 324–338, 2000.
[60] C. A. Ellis and S. A. Parbery, “Is smarter better? a comparison of adaptive, and simple moving
average trading strategies,” Research in International Business and Finance , vol. 19, no. 3, pp.
399–411, 2005.
[61] “coinmarketcap.com,” http:https://coinmarketcap.com/, 2013, accessed: 30 May 2017.
[62] G. T. Friedlob and F. J. Plewa Jr, Understanding return on investment . John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
[63] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining . ACM, 2016, pp.
785–794.
[64] K. Inc. (2018) Kaggle. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/
[65] Z. C. Lipton, J. Berkowitz, and C. Elkan, “A critical review of recurrent neural networks for sequence
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.00019 , 2015.
[66] B. Wiki. (2017) Comparison of exchanges. [Online]. Available: https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/
Comparison of exchanges
[67] H. S. Moat, C. Curme, A. Avakian, D. Y. Kenett, H. E. Stanley, and T. Preis, “Quantifying
wikipedia usage patterns before stock market moves,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 3, p. 1801, 2013.
[68] D. Kondor, I. Csabai, J. Sz¨ ule, M. P´ osfai, and G. Vattay, “Inferring the interplay between network
structure and market eﬀects in bitcoin,” New Journal of Physics , vol. 16, no. 12, p. 125003, 2014.
[69] L. Kristoufek, “What are the main drivers of the bitcoin price? evidence from wavelet coherence
analysis,” PloS one, vol. 10, no. 4, p. e0123923, 2015.
[70] D. Garcia and F. Schweitzer, “Social signals and algorithmic trading of bitcoin,” Royal Society
Open Science, vol. 2, no. 9, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/
content/2/9/150288
[71] L. Kristoufek, “Bitcoin meets google trends and wikipedia: Quantifying the relationship between
phenomena of the internet era,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 3, p. 3415, 2013.
[72] A. Urquhart, “What causes the attention of bitcoin?” Economics Letters, vol. 166, pp. 40 – 44,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016517651830065X
15

## Page 16

[73] D. Garcia, C. J. Tessone, P. Mavrodiev, and N. Perony, “The digital traces of bubbles: feedback cy-
cles between socio-economic signals in the bitcoin economy,” Journal of the Royal Society Interface ,
vol. 11, no. 99, p. 20140623, 2014.
[74] S. Wang and J.-P. Vergne, “Buzz factor or innovation potential: What explains cryptocurrencies
returns?” PloS one, vol. 12, no. 1, p. e0169556, 2017.
[75] T. R. Li, A. S. Chamrajnagar, X. R. Fong, N. R. Rizik, and F. Fu, “Sentiment-based prediction
of alternative cryptocurrency price ﬂuctuations using gradient boosting tree model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.00558, 2018.
16

## Page 17

Appendix
A1 Parameter optimisation
In Fig. A1, we show the optimisation of the parameters w (A,C) and n (B,D) for the baseline strategy. In
Fig. A2, we show the optimisation of the parameters w (A,D), Wtraining (B,E), and n (C,F) for Method
1. In Fig. A3, we show the optimisation of the parameters w (A,D), Wtraining (B,E), and n (C,F) for
Method 2. In Fig. A4, we show the median squared error obtained under diﬀerent training window
choices (A), number of epochs (B) and number of neurons (C), for Ethereum, Bitcoin and Ripple. In
Fig. A5, we show the optimisation of the parameter n (C,F) for Method 3.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
geometric mean optimization
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Sharpe ratio optimization
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
5
10
15
20
25w (days)
A
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
5
10
15
n, currencies
B
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
10
20w (days)
C
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
5
10
15
n, currencies
D
Figure A1: Baseline strategy: parameters optimisation. The sliding window w (A,C) and the
number of currencies n (B,D) chosen over time under the geometric mean (A,B) and the Sharpe Ratio
optimisation (C,D). Analyses are performed considering prices in BTC.
17

## Page 18

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
geometric mean optimization
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Sharpe ratio optimization
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
4
6
8
10w (days)
A
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
5
10
15
20
Wtraining(days)
B
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
0
10
20
30
40
n, currencies
C
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
4
6
8
10w (days)
D
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
5
10
15
20
Wtraining(days)
E
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
0
10
20
30
40
n, currencies
F
Figure A2: Method 1: Parameters optimisation. The sliding window w (A,D), the training window
Wtraining (B,E) and the number of currencies n (C,F) chosen over time under the geometric mean
(A,B,C) and the Sharpe Ratio optimisation (D,E,F). Analyses are performed considering prices in BTC.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
geometric mean optimization
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Sharpe ratio optimization
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0w (days)
A
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
5
10
15
20
Wtraining(days)
B
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
0
20
40
60
n, currencies
C
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0w (days)
D
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
5
10
15
20
Wtraining(days)
E
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
0
50
100
150
n, currencies
F
Figure A3: Method 2: Parameters optimisation. The sliding window w (A,D), the training window
Wtraining (B,E) and the number of currencies n (C,F) chosen over time under the geometric mean
(A,B,C) and the Sharpe Ratio optimisation (D,E,F). Analyses are performed considering prices in BTC.
18

## Page 19

10 20 30 40 50 60 70
w (days)
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020mse
A Bitcoin Ripple Ethereum Average
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
epochs
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014mse
B
Bitcoin Ripple Ethereum Average
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0
neurons
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
0.016mse
C
Bitcoin Ripple Ethereum Average
Figure A4: Method 3: Parameters optimisation. The median squared error of the ROI as a function
of the window size (A), the number of epochs (B) and the number of neurons (C). Results are shown
considering prices in Bitcoin.
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
1
2
3
4
5
n, currencies
A
geometric mean optimization
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
n, currencies
B
Sharpe ratio optimization
Figure A5: Method 3: Parameters optimisation. The number of currencies n chosen over time
under the geometric mean (A) and the Sharpe Ratio optimisation (B). Analyses are performed considering
prices in BTC.
19

## Page 20

A2 Return under full knowledge of the market evolution.
In Fig. A6, we show the cumulative return obtained by investing every day in the top currency, supposing
one knows the prices of currencies on the following day.
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
109
1027
1045
1063
1081
1099
10117
cumulative return
Baseline
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3
upper-bound
Figure A6: Upper-bound for the cumulative return. The cumulative return obtained by investing
every day in the currency with highest return on the following day (black line). The cumulative return
obtained with the baseline (blue line), Method 1 (orange line), Method 2 (green line), and Method 3
(red line). Results are shown in Bitcoin.
A3 Return obtained paying transaction fees.
In this section, we present the results obtained including transaction fees between 0 .1% and 1% [66]. In
general, one can not trade a given currency with any given other. Hence, we consider that each day we
trade twice: We sell altcoins to buy Bitcoin, and we buy new altcoins using Bitcoin. The mean return
obtained between Jan. 2016 and Apr. 2018 is larger than 1 for all methods, for fees up to 0 .2% (see
Table A1). In this period, Method 3 achieves positive returns for fees up to 1%. The returns obtained
with a 0 .1% (see Fig. A7) and 0 .2% (see Fig. A8) fee during arbitrary periods conﬁrm that, in general,
one obtains positive gains with our methods if fees are small enough.
no fee 0 .1% 0 .2% 0 .3% 0 .5% 1%
Baseline 1.005 1.003 1.001 0.999 0.995 0.985
Method 1 1.008 1.006 1.004 1.002 0.998 0.988
Method 2 1.005 1.003 1.001 0.999 0.995 0.985
Method 3 1.025 1.023 1.021 1.019 1.015 1.005
Table A1: Daily geometric mean return for diﬀerent transaction fees. Results are obtained
considering the period between Jan. 2016 and Apr. 2018.
20

## Page 21

03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
end
BaselineA
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
end
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
start
Method 1B
Method 2C
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
start
Method 3D
-1 -0.1 -0.01 0 0.01 0.1 1
G-1
Figure A7: Daily geometric mean return obtained under transaction fees of 0.1%. The geo-
metric mean return computed between time ”start” and ”end” using the Sharpe ratio optimisation for
the baseline (A), Method 1 (B), Method 2 (C) and Method 3 (D). Note that, for visualization purposes,
the ﬁgure shows the translated geometric mean return G-1. Shades of red refers to negative returns and
shades of blue to positive ones (see colour bar).
21

## Page 22

03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
end
BaselineA
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
end
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
start
Method 1B
Method 2C
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
start
Method 3D
-1 -0.1 -0.01 0 0.01 0.1 1
G-1
Figure A8: Daily geometric mean return obtained under transaction fees of 0.2%. The geo-
metric mean return computed between time ”start” and ”end” using the Sharpe ratio optimisation for
the baseline (A), Method 1 (B), Method 2 (C) and Method 3 (D). Note that, for visualization purposes,
the ﬁgure shows the translated geometric mean return G-1. Shades of red refers to negative returns and
shades of blue to positive ones (see colour bar).
22

## Page 23

A4 Results in USD
In this section, we show results obtained considering prices in USD. The price of Bitcoin in USD has
considerably increased in the period considered. Hence, gains in USD (Fig. A9) are higher than those in
Bitcoin (Fig. 5). Note that, in Fig. A9, we have made predictions and computed portfolios considering
prices in Bitcoin. Then, gains have been converted to USD (without transaction fees). In Table A2, we
show instead the gains obtained running predictions considering directly all prices in USD. We ﬁnd that,
in most cases, better results are obtained from prices in BTC.
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
10 2
101
104
107
1010
cumulative return (USD)
A
geometric mean optimization
Baseline
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3
May 
 16
Nov 
 16
May 
 17
Nov 
 17
May 
 18
100
103
106
109
cumulative return (USD)
B
Sharpe ratio optimization
Baseline
Method 1
Method 2
Method 3
Figure A9: Cumulative returns in USD. The cumulative returns obtained under the Sharpe Ratio
optimisation (A) and the geometric mean optimisation (B) for the baseline (blue line), Method 1 (orange
line), Method 2 (green line) and Method 3 (red line). Analyses are performed considering prices in BTC.
Geometric mean in USD (from BTC prices) Geometric mean in USD (from USD prices)
Baseline 1.0086 1.0141
Method1 1.0121 1.0085
Method2 1.0091 1.0086
Method3 1.0289 1.0134
Table A2: Geometric mean returns in USD.Results are obtained for the various methods by running
the algorithms considering prices in BTC (left column) and USD (right column).
A5 Geometric mean optimisation
In Fig. A10, we show the geometric mean return obtained by between two arbitrary points in time under
geometric mean return optimisation for the baseline (Fig. A10-A), Method 1 (Fig. A10-B), Method 2
(Fig. A10-C), and Method 3 (Fig. A10-D).
23

## Page 24

03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
end
BaselineA
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
end
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
start
Method 1B
Method 2C
03- 2016
06- 2016
09- 2016
12- 2016
03- 2017
06- 2017
09- 2017
12- 2017
03- 2018
start
Method 3D
-1 -0.1 -0.01 0 0.01 0.1 1
G-1
Figure A10: Geometric mean return obtained within diﬀerent periods of time. The geometric
mean return computed between time ”start” and ”end” using the Sharpe ratio optimisation for the
baseline (A), Method 1 (B), Method 2 (C) and Method 3 (D). Note that, for visualization purposes,
the ﬁgure shows the translated geometric mean return G-1. Shades of red refers to negative returns and
shades of blue to positive ones (see colour bar).
24

