# Deep Learning Statistical Arbitrage

- Source PDF: ./2106.04028.pdf
- arXiv URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.04028

## Full Extracted Content

## Page 1

Deep Learning Statistical Arbitrage ∗
Jorge Guijarro-Ordonez † Markus Pelger ‡ Greg Zanotti §
This draft: September 25, 2022
First draft: March 15, 2019
Abstract
Statistical arbitrage exploits temporal price diﬀerences between similar assets. We develop a
unifying conceptual framework for statistical arbitrage and a novel data driven solution. First,
we construct arbitrage portfolios of similar assets as residual portfolios from conditional latent
asset pricing factors. Second, we extract their time series signals with a powerful machine-
learning time-series solution, a convolutional transformer. Lastly, we use these signals to form
an optimal trading policy, that maximizes risk-adjusted returns under constraints. Our com-
prehensive empirical study on daily US equities shows a high compensation for arbitrageurs to
enforce the law of one price. Our arbitrage strategies obtain consistently high out-of-sample
mean returns and Sharpe ratios, and substantially outperform all benchmark approaches.
Keywords: statistical arbitrage, pairs trading, machine learning, deep learning, big data, stock
returns, convolutional neural network, transformer, attention, factor model, market eﬃciency,
investment.
JEL classiﬁcation: C14, C38, C55, G12
∗We thank Robert Anderson, Jose Blanchet, Marcelo Fernandes, Kay Giesecke, Lisa Goldberg, Amit Goyal (discussant),
Bryan Kelly, Robert Korajczyk, Martin Lettau, Sophia Li, Marcelo Medeiros, Scott Murray, George Papanicolaou, Guofu
Zhou (discussant) and seminar and conference participants at Stanford, UC Berkeley, Rutgers University, GSU CEAR Finance
Conference, NBER-NSF Time-Series Conference, AI and Big Data in Finance Research Seminar, AI in Fintech Forum, World
Congress of the Bachelier Finance Society, Society of Financial Econometrics Annual Conference, the Econometric Research in
Finance Workshop, the Meeting of the Brazilian Finance Society, World Online Seminars on Machine Learning in Finance, the
Machine Learning and Quantitative Finance Workshop at Oxford, Annual Bloomberg-Columbia Machine Learning in Finance
Workshop, NVIDIA AI Webinar, Vanguard Academic Seminar, INFORMS and the Western Conference on Mathematical
Finance for helpful comments. We thank MSCI for generous research support.
†Stanford University, Department of Mathematics, Email: jguiord@stanford.edu.
‡Stanford University, Department of Management Science & Engineering, Email: mpelger@stanford.edu.
§Stanford University, Department of Management Science & Engineering, Email: gzanotti@stanford.edu.
arXiv:2106.04028v2 [cs.LG] 7 Oct 2022

## Page 2

I. Introduction
Statistical arbitrage is one of the pillars of quantitative trading, and has long been used by
hedge funds and investment banks. The term statistical arbitrage encompasses a wide variety of
investment strategies, which identify and exploit temporal price diﬀerences between similar assets
using statistical methods. Conceptually, they are based on relative trades between a stock and a
mimicking portfolio. The mimicking portfolio is constructed to be “similar” to the target stock,
usually based on historical co-movements in the price time-series or similar ﬁrm characteristics.
When the spread between the prices of the two comparison assets widens, the arbitrageur sells the
winner and buys the loser. If their prices move back together, the arbitrageur will proﬁt. While
Wall Street has developed a plethora of proprietary tools for sophisticated arbitrage trading, there is
still a lack of understanding of how much arbitrage opportunity is actually left in ﬁnancial markets.
In this paper we answer the two key questions around statistical arbitrage: What are the important
elements of a successful arbitrage strategy and how much realistic arbitrage is in ﬁnancial markets?
Every statistical arbitrage strategy needs to solve the following three fundamental problems:
Given a large universe of assets, what are long-short portfolios of similar assets? Given these
portfolios, what are time series signals that indicate the presence of temporary price deviations?
Last, but not least, given these signals, how should an arbitrageur trade them to optimize a trading
objective while taking into account possible constraints and market frictions? Each of these three
questions poses substantial challenges, that prior work has only partly addressed. First, it is a
hard problem to ﬁnd long-short portfolios for all stocks as it is a priori unknown what constitutes
“similarity”. This problem requires considering all the big data available for a large number of
assets and times, including not just conventional return data but also exogenous information like
asset characteristics. Second, extracting the right signals requires detecting ﬂexibly all the relevant
patterns in the noisy, complex, low-sample-size time series of the portfolio prices. Last but not
least, optimal trading rules on a multitude of signals and assets are complicated and depend on
the trading objective. All of these challenges fundamentally require ﬂexible estimation tools that
can deal with many variables. It is a natural idea to use machine learning techniques like deep
neural networks to deal with the high dimensionality and complex functional dependencies of the
problem. However, our problem is diﬀerent from the usual prediction task, where machine learning
tools excel. We show how to optimally design a machine learning solution to our problem that
leverages the economic structure and objective.
In this paper, we propose a unifying conceptual framework that generalizes common approaches
to statistical arbitrage. Statistical arbitrage can be decomposed into three fundamental elements:
(1) arbitrage portfolio generation, (2) arbitrage signal extraction and (3) the arbitrage allocation
decision given the signal. By decomposing diﬀerent methods into their arbitrage portfolio, signal
and allocation element, we can compare diﬀerent methods and study which components are the most
relevant for successful trading. For each step we develop a novel machine learning implementation,
which we compare with conventional methods. As a result, we construct a new deep learning
statistical arbitrage approach. Our new approach constructs arbitrage portfolios with a conditional
1

## Page 3

latent factor model, extracts the signals with the currently most successful machine learning time-
series method and maps them into a trading allocation with a ﬂexible neural network. These
components are integrated and optimized over a global economic objective, which maximizes the
risk-adjusted return under constraints. Empirically, our general model outperforms out-of-sample
the leading benchmark approaches and provides a clear insight into the structure of statistical
arbitrage.
To construct arbitrage portfolios, we introduce the economically motivated asset pricing per-
spective to create them as residuals relative to asset pricing models. This perspective allows us to
take advantage of the recent developments in asset pricing and to also include a large set of ﬁrm
characteristics in the construction of the arbitrage portfolios. We use fundamental risk factors and
conditional and unconditional statistical factors for our asset pricing models. Similarity between as-
sets is captured by similar exposure to those factors. Hence, arbitrage portfolios are trades relative
to mimicking stock portfolios, which are well-diversiﬁed portfolios with the same exposure to risk
factors. In the case of statistical principal component factors, the mimicking portfolios correspond
to assets with the highest correlation with the target stocks. Arbitrage Pricing Theory provides
a justiﬁcation for mean reversion patterns. It implies that, with an appropriate model, the corre-
sponding factor portfolios represent the “fair price” of each of the assets. Therefore, the residual
portfolios relative to the asset pricing factors capture the temporary deviations from the fair price
of each of the assets and should only temporally deviate from their long-term mean. Importantly,
the residuals are tradeable portfolios, which are only weakly cross-sectionally correlated, and close
to orthogonal to ﬁrm characteristics and systematic factors. These properties allow us to extract a
stationary time-series model for the signal.
To detect time series patterns and signals in the residual portfolios, we introduce a ﬁlter perspec-
tive and estimate them with a ﬂexible data-driven ﬁlter based on convolutional networks combined
with transformers. In this way, we do not prescribe a potentially misspeciﬁed function to extract the
time series structure, for example, by estimating the parameters of a given parametric time-series
model, or the coeﬃcients of a decomposition into given basis functions, as in conventional methods.
Instead, we directly learn in a data-driven way what the optimal pattern extraction function is for
our trading objective. The convolutional transformer is the ideal method for this purpose. Convo-
lutional neural networks are the state-of-the-art AI method for pattern recognition, in particular
in computer vision. In our case they identify the local patterns in the data and may be thought
as a nonlinear and learnable generalization of conventional kernel-based data ﬁlters. Transformer
networks are the most successful AI model for time series in natural language processing. In our
model, they combine the local patterns to global time-series patterns. Their combination results in
a data-driven ﬂexible time-series ﬁlter that can essentially extract any complex time-series signal,
while providing an interpretable model.
To ﬁnd the optimal trading allocation, we propose neural networks to map the arbitrage signals
into a complex trading allocation. This generalizes conventional parametric rules, for example ﬁxed
rules based on thresholds, which are only valid under strong model assumptions and a small signal
2

## Page 4

dimension. Importantly, these components are integrated and optimized over a global economic
objective, which maximizes the risk-adjusted return under constraints. This allows our model
to learn the optimal signals and allocation for the actual trading objective, which is diﬀerent
from a prediction objective. The trading objective can maximize the Sharpe ratio or expected
return subject to a risk penalty, while taking into account constraints important to real investment
managers, such as restricting turnover, leverage, or proportion of short trades.
Our comprehensive empirical out-of-sample analysis is based on the daily returns of roughly the
550 largest and most liquid stocks in the U.S. from 1998 to 2016. We estimate the out-of-sample
residuals on a rolling window relative to the empirically most important factor models. These
are observed fundamental factors, for example the Fama-French 5 factors and price trend factors,
locally estimated latent factors based on principal component analysis (PCA) or locally estimated
conditional latent factors that include the information in 46 ﬁrm-speciﬁc characteristics and are
based on the Instrumented PCA (IPCA) of Kelly et al. (2019). We extract the trading signal with
one of the most successful parametric models, based on the mean-reverting Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process, a frequency decomposition of the time-series with a Fourier transformation and our novel
convolutional network with transformer. Finally, we compare the trading allocations based on
parametric or nonparametric rules estimated with diﬀerent risk-adjusted trading objectives.
Our empirical main ﬁndings are ﬁve-fold. First, our deep learning statistical arbitrage model
substantially outperforms all benchmark approaches out-of-sample. In fact, our model can achieve
an impressive annual Sharpe ratio larger than four. While respecting short-selling constraints we
can obtain annual out-of-sample mean returns of 20%. This performance is four times better than
one of the best parametric arbitrage models, and twice as good as an alternative deep learning
model without the convolutional transformer ﬁlter. These results are particularly impressive as we
only trade the largest and most liquid stocks. Hence, our model establishes a new standard for
arbitrage trading.
Second, the performance of our deep learning model suggests that there is a substantial amount
of short-term arbitrage in ﬁnancial markets. The proﬁtability of our strategies is orthogonal to
market movements and conventional risk factors including momentum and reversal factors and
does not constitute a risk-premium. Our strategy performs consistently well over the full time
horizon. The model is extremely robust to the choice of tuning parameters, and the period when
it is estimated. Importantly, our arbitrage strategy remains proﬁtable in the presence of realistic
transaction and holdings costs. Arbitrage signals are persistent over short time horizons. While
arbitrageurs correct most mispricing over the horizon of a month, around half of the Sharpe ratio
can persist for a holding period of one week. Assessing the amount of arbitrage in ﬁnancial markets
with unconditional pricing errors relative to factor models or with parametric statistical arbitrage
models, severely underestimates the amount of statistical arbitrage.
Third, the trading signal extraction is the most challenging and separating element among dif-
ferent arbitrage models. Surprisingly, the choice of asset pricing factors has only a minor eﬀect
on the overall performance. Residuals relative to the ﬁve Fama-French factors and ﬁve locally
3

## Page 5

estimated principal component factors perform very well with out-of-sample Sharpe ratios above
3.2 for our deep learning model. Five conditional IPCA factors increase the out-of-sample Sharpe
ratio to 4.2, which suggests that asset characteristics provide additional useful information. In-
creasing the number of risk factors beyond ﬁve has only a marginal eﬀect. Similarly, the other
benchmark models are robust to the choice of factor model as long as it contains suﬃciently many
factors. The distinguishing element is the time-series model to extract the arbitrage signal. The
convolutional transformer doubles the performance relative to an identical deep learning model
with a pre-speciﬁed frequency ﬁlter. Importantly, we highlight that time-series modeling requires a
time-series machine learning approach, which takes temporal dependency into account. An oﬀ-the-
shelf nonparametric machine learning method like conventional neural networks, that estimates an
arbitrage allocation directly from residuals, performs substantially worse.
Fourth, successful arbitrage trading is based on local asymmetric trend and reversion patterns.
Our convolutional transformer framework provides an interpretable representation of the underlying
patterns, based on local basic patterns and global “dependency factors”. The building blocks of
arbitrage trading are smooth trend and reversion patterns. The arbitrage trading is short-term
and the last 30 trading days seem to capture the relevant information. Interestingly, the direction
of policies is asymmetric. The model reacts quickly on downturn movements, but more cautiously
on uptrends. More speciﬁcally, the “dependency factors” which are the most active in downturn
movements focus only on the most recent 10 days, while those for upward movements focus on the
ﬁrst 20 days in a 30-day window.
Fifth, time-series-based trading patterns should be extracted from residuals and not directly
from returns. For an appropriate factor model, the residuals are only weakly correlated and close
to stationary in both, the time and cross-sectional dimension. Hence, it is meaningful to extract
a uniform trading pattern, that is based only on the past time-series information, from the resid-
uals. In contrast stock returns are dominated by a few factors, which severely limits the actual
independent time-series information, and are strongly heterogenous due to their variation in ﬁrm
characteristics. While the level of stock returns is extremely hard to predict, even with ﬂexible
machine learning methods, residuals capture relative movements and remove the level component.
These properties make residuals analyzable from a purely time-series based perspective and, unlike
the existing literature, they allow us to incorporate alternative data into the portfolio construction
process. This also highlights a fundamental diﬀerence with most of the existing ﬁnancial machine
learning literature: We do not use characteristics to get features for prediction, but rather to obtain
the data orthogonal to these features.
Related Literature
Our paper builds on the classical statistical arbitrage literature, in which the three main prob-
lems of portfolio generation, pattern extraction, and allocation decision have traditionally been
considered independently. Classical statistical methods of generating arbitrage portfolios have
mostly focused on obtaining multiple pairs or small portfolios of assets, using techniques like the
4

## Page 6

distance method of Gatev et al. (2006), the cointegration approach of Vidyamurthy (2004), or cop-
ulas as in Rad et al. (2016). In contrast, more general methods that exploit large panels of stock
returns include the use of PCA factor models, as in Avellaneda and Lee (2010) and its extension
in Yeo and Papanicolaou (2017), and the maximization of mean-reversion and sparsity statistics as
in d’Aspremont (2011). We include the model of Yeo and Papanicolaou (2017) as the parametric
benchmark model in our study as it has one of the best empirical performances among the class of
parametric models. Our paper paper contributes to this literature by introducing a general asset
pricing perspective to obtain the arbitrage portfolios as residuals. This allows us to take advantage
of conditional asset pricing models, that include time-varying ﬁrm characteristics in addition to the
return time-series, and provides a more disciplined, economically motivated approach. The signal
extraction step for these models assumes parametric time series models for the arbitrage portfolios,
whereas the allocations are often decided from the estimated parameters by using stochastic con-
trol methods or given threshold rules and one-period optimizations. Some representative papers
of the ﬁrst approach include Jurek and Yang (2007), Mudchanatongsuk et al. (2008), Cartea and
Jaimungal (2016), Lintilhac and Tourin (2016) and Leung and Li (2015), whereas the second one is
illustrated by Elliott et al. (2005) and Yeo and Papanicolaou (2017). Both approaches are special
cases of our more general framework. Mulvey et al. (2020) and Kim and Kim (2019) are exam-
ples of including machine learning elements within the parametric statistical arbitrage framework,
by either solving a stochastic control problem with neural networks or estimating a time-varying
threshold rule with reinforcement learning.
Our paper is complementary to the emerging literature that uses machine learning methods for
asset pricing. While the asset pricing literature aims to explain the risk premia of assets, our focus is
on the residual component which is not explained by the asset pricing models. Chen et al. (2022),
Bryzgalova et al. (2019) and Kozak et al. (2020) estimate the stochastic discount factor (SDF),
which explains the risk premia of assets, with deep neural networks, decision trees or elastic net
regularization. These papers employ advanced statistical methods to solve a conditional method of
moment problem in the presence of many variables. The workhorse models in equity asset pricing
are based on linear factor models exempliﬁed by Fama and French (1993, 2015). Recently, new
methods have been developed to extract statistical asset pricing factors from large panels with
various versions of principal component analysis (PCA). The Risk-Premium PCA in Lettau and
Pelger (2020a,b) includes a pricing error penalty to detect weak factors that explain the cross-
section of returns. The high-frequency PCA in Pelger (2020) uses high-frequency data to estimate
local time-varying latent risk factors and the Instrumented PCA (IPCA) of Kelly et al. (2019)
estimates conditional latent factors by allowing the loadings to be functions of time-varying asset
characteristics. Gu et al. (2021) generalize IPCA to allow the loadings to be nonlinear functions of
characteristics. Giglio and Xiu (2021) use PCA factors to account for missing priced factors in risk
premia estimation. He et al. (2022) highlight the important insight that the time-series of residuals
can be informative for trading. They test asset pricing models by studying the proﬁtability of
trading residuals based on high-minus-low sorting strategies of prior residual returns.
5

## Page 7

Our paper is related to the growing literature on return prediction with machine learning meth-
ods, which has shown the beneﬁts of regularized ﬂexible methods. In their pioneering work Gu et al.
(2020) conduct a comparison of machine learning methods for predicting the panel of individual
U.S. stock returns based on the asset-speciﬁc characteristics and economic conditions in the previ-
ous period. Freyberger et al. (2020) use diﬀerent methods for predicting stock returns. In a similar
spirit, Bianchi et al. (2019) predict bond returns, Li and Rossi (2020) predict mutual fund returns,
and Bali et al. (2022) predict option returns. A related stream extends cross-sectional machine
learning prediction to higher moments and residuals, which are used for investment decisions. Li
and Tang (2022) use machine learning to predict risk measures and estimate conditional volatil-
ities. Kaniel et al. (2022) and DeMiguel et al. (2022) predict the skill of mutual fund managers
based on residuals from benchmark asset pricing factors. The return prediction literature is funda-
mentally estimating the risk premia of assets, while our focus is on understanding and exploiting
the temporal deviations thereof. This diﬀerent goal is reﬂected in the diﬀerent methods that are
needed. These return predictions estimate a nonparametric cross-sectional model between current
returns and large set of covariates from the last period, but do not estimate a time-series model.
In contrast, the important challenge that we solve is to extract a complex time-series pattern.
A related stream of the return prediction literature forecasts returns using past returns, generally
followed by some long-short investment policy based on the prediction. For example, Krauss et al.
(2017) use various machine learning methods for this type of prediction.1 However, they use general
nonparametric function estimates, which are not speciﬁcally designed for time-series data. Lim and
Zohren (2020) show that it is important for machine learning solutions to explicitly account for
temporal dependence when they are applied to time-series data. Murray et al. (2021) and Jiang et al.
(2022) build on this insight and use machine learning to learn price trends for return forecasting.
Forecasting returns and building a long-short portfolio based on the prediction is diﬀerent from
statistical arbitrage trading as it combines a risk premium and potential arbitrage component. It
is not based on temporary price diﬀerences and also in general not orthogonal to common risk
factors and market movements. In this paper we highlight the challenge of inferring complex
time-series information and argue that using returns directly as an input to a time-series machine
learning method, can be suboptimal as returns are dominated by a few factor time-series and are
heterogeneous due to cross-sectionally and time-varying characteristics. In contrast, appropriate
residuals are close to uncorrelated and locally cross-sectionally stationary. Hence, appropriate
residuals allow the extraction of a complex time-series pattern.
Naturally, our work overlaps with the literature on using machine learning tools for investment.
The SDF estimated by asset pricing models, like in Chen et al. (2022) and Bryzgalova et al. (2019),
directly maps into a conditionally mean-variance eﬃcient portfolio and hence an attractive invest-
ment opportunity. However, by construction this investment portfolio is not orthogonal but fully
exposed to systematic risk, which is exactly the opposite for an arbitrage portfolio. Prediction
approaches also imply investment strategies, typically long-short portfolios based on the predic-
1Similar studies include Fischer et al. (2019), Chen et al. (2018), Huck (2009), and Dunis et al. (2006).
6

## Page 8

tion signal. However, estimating a signal with a prediction objective, is not necessarily providing
an optimal signal for investment. Bryzgalova et al. (2019) and Chen et al. (2022) illustrate that
machine learning models that use a trading objective can result in a substantially more proﬁtable
investment than models that estimate a signal with a prediction objective, while using the same
information as input and having the same ﬂexibility. This is also conﬁrmed in Cong et al. (2020),
who use an investment objective and reinforcement learning to construct machine learning invest-
ment portfolios. Our paper contributes to this literature by estimating investment strategies, that
are orthogonal to systematic risk and are based on a trading objective with constraints.
Finally, our approach is also informed by the recent deep learning for time series literature. The
transformer method was ﬁrst introduced in the groundbreaking paper by Vaswani et al. (2017). We
are the ﬁrst to bring this idea into the context of statistical arbitrage and adopt it to the economic
problem.
II. Model
The fundamental problem of statistical arbitrage consists of three elements: (1) The identiﬁca-
tion of similar assets to generate arbitrage portfolios, (2) the extraction of time-series signals for
the temporary deviations of the similarity between assets and (3) a trading policy in the arbitrage
portfolios based on the time-series signals. We discuss each element separately.
A. Arbitrage portfolios
We consider a panel of excess returns Rn,t, that is the return minus risk free rate of stock
n = 1,...,N t at time t = 1,...,T . The number of available assets at time t can be time-varying.
The excess return vector of all assets at time t is denoted as Rt =
(
R1,t ··· RNt,t
)⊤
.
We use a general asset pricing model to identify similar assets. In this context, similarity is
deﬁned as the same exposure to systematic risk, which implies that assets with the same risk
exposure should have the same fundamental value. We assume that asset returns can be modeled
by a conditional factor model:
Rn,t =β⊤
n,t−1Ft +ϵn,t.
TheK factorsF∈ R T×K capture the systematic risk, while the risk loadingsβt−1∈ R Nt×K can be
general functions of the information set at time t− 1 and hence can be time-varying. This general
formulation includes the empirically most successful factor models. In our empirical analysis we
will include observed traded factors, e.g. the Fama-French 5 factor model, latent factors based on
the principal components analysis (PCA) of stock returns and conditional latent factors estimated
with Instrumented Principal Component Analysis (IPCA).
Without loss of generality, we can treat the factors as excess returns of traded assets. Either
the factors are traded, for example a market factor, in which case we include them in the returns
7

## Page 9

Rt. Otherwise, we can generate factor mimicking portfolios by projecting them on the asset space,
as for example with latent factors:
Ft =wF
t−1
⊤
Rt.
We deﬁne arbitrage portfolios as residual portfolios ϵn,t = Rn,t−β⊤
n,t−1Ft. As factors are traded
assets, the arbitrage portfolios are themselves traded portfolios. Hence, the vector of residual
portfolios equals
ϵt =Rt−βt−1wF
t−1
⊤
Rt =
(
INt−βt−1wF
t−1
⊤)
  
Φt−1
Rt = Φt−1Rt. (1)
Arbitrage portfolios are trades relative to mimicking stock portfolios. The factor component
in the residuals corresponds to a well-diversiﬁed mimicking portfolio, that is is “close” to the
speciﬁc stock in the relative trade. More speciﬁcally, in the case of PCA factors, we construct
well-diversiﬁed portfolios of stocks that have the highest correlation with each target stock in the
relative trades. This is conceptually the same idea as using some form of clustering algorithm to
construct a portfolio of highly correlated stocks.2 Hence, residuals of PCA factors construct relative
trades based on correlations in past return time-series. In the case of IPCA factors, we intuitively
construct for each stock a well-diversiﬁed mimicking portfolio that is as similar as possible in terms
of the underlying ﬁrm characteristics. Hence, the mimicking portfolio represents an asset with very
similar ﬁrm fundamentals. Lastly, for Fama-French factors, we construct mimicking portfolios with
the same exposure to those fundamental factors. In all cases, the choice of factor model implies a
notation of similarity. By construction the mimicking portfolio and the target stock have identical
loadings to the selected factors.
Arbitrage trading relative to mimicking portfolios takes advantage of all assets in the market.
In practice and modern statistical arbitrage theory, it has replaced the more restrictive idea of
pairs trading, which considers relative trades between only two stocks. On an intuitive level, the
mimicking portfolio represents the reference asset in the relative trade. It can be constructed even
if there does not exist an individual stock that is highly correlated with a target stock.
Our arbitrage portfolios based on residuals also allow us to beneﬁt from an asset pricing per-
spective. Arbitrage portfolios are projections on the return space that annihilate systematic asset
risk. For an appropriate asset pricing model, the residual portfolios should not earn a risk premium.
This is the fundamental assumption behind any arbitrage argument. As deviations from a mean of
zero have to be temporary, arbitrage trading bets on the mean revision of the residuals. In partic-
ular, for an appropriate factor model the residuals are expected to have the following properties:
First, the unconditional mean of the arbitrage portfolios is zero, E [ϵn,t] = 0. Second, the arbitrage
portfolios are only weakly cross-sectionally dependent. We conﬁrm empirically that once we use
suﬃciently many statistical or fundamental factors the residuals are indeed close to uncorrelated
2In fact, under appropriate assumptions a clustering problem can be solved by a latent factor estimation.
8

## Page 10

and have an average mean close to zero. However, while the asset pricing perspective provides a
theoretical argument for mean reversion in residuals, our approach is still valid even if we omit
some relevant risk factors. The relative trades would then only exploit the temporal time-series
deviations from the risk factors captured by the mimicking portfolios.
We denote byFt−1 the ﬁltration generated by the returns Rt−1, which include the factors, and
the information set that captures the risk exposure βt−1, which is typically based on asset speciﬁc
characteristics or past returns.
B. Arbitrage signal
The arbitrage signal is extracted from the time-series of the arbitrage portfolios. These time-
series signals are the input for a trading policy. An example for an arbitrage signal would be a
parametric model for mean reversion that is estimated for each arbitrage portfolio. The trading
strategy for each arbitrage portfolio would depend on its speed of mean reversion and its deviation
from the long run mean. More generally, the arbitrage signal is the estimation of a time-series model,
which can be parametric or nonparametric. An important class of models are ﬁltering approaches.
Conceptually, time-series models are multivariate functional mappings between sequences, which
take into account the temporal order of the elements and potentially complex dependencies between
the elements of the input sequence.
We apply the signal extraction to the time-series of the lastL lagged residuals, which we denote
in vector notation as
ϵL
n,t−1 :=
(
ϵn,t−L ··· ϵn,t−1
)
.
The arbitrage signal function is a mapping θ∈ Θ from R L to R p, where Θ deﬁnes an appropriate
function space:
θ(·) :ϵL
n,t−1→θn,t−1.
The signals θn,t−1 ∈ R p for the arbitrage portfolio n at time t only depend on the time-series
of lagged returns ϵL
n,t−1. Note that the dimensionality of the signal can be the same as for the
input sequence. Formally, the function θ is a mapping from the ﬁltration Fϵ,L
n,t−1 generated by
ϵL
n,t−1 into the ﬁltration Fθ
n,t−1 generated by θn,t−1 andFθ
n,t−1 ⊆F ϵ,L
n,t−1. We use the notation
of evaluating functions elementwise, that is θ(ϵL
t−1) =
(
θ1,t−1 ··· θNt,t−1
)
= θt−1∈ R Nt with
ϵL
t−1 =
(
ϵ1,t−1 ··· ϵNt,t−1
)
.
The arbitrage signal θn,t−1 is a suﬃcient statistic for the trading policy; that is, all relevant
information for trading decisions is summarized in it. This also implies that two arbitrage portfolios
with the same signal get the same weight in the trading strategy. More formally, this means that the
arbitrage signal deﬁnes equivalence classes for the arbitrage portfolios. The most relevant signals
summarize reversal patterns and their direction with a small number of parameters. A potential
9

## Page 11

trading policy could be to hold long positions in residuals with a predicted upward movement and
go short in residuals that are in a downward cycle.
This problem formulation makes two implicit assumptions. First, the residual time-series follow
a stationary distribution conditioned on its lagged returns. This is a very general framework that
includes the most important models for ﬁnancial time-series. Second, the ﬁrst L lagged returns are
a suﬃcient statistic to obtain the arbitrage signalθn,t−1. This reﬂects the motivation that arbitrage
is a temporary deviation of the fair price. The lookback window can be chosen to be arbitrarily
large, but in practice it is limited by the availability of lagged returns.
C. Arbitrage trading
The trading policy assigns an investment weight to each arbitrage portfolio based on its signal.
The allocation weight is the solution to an optimization problem, which models a general risk-return
tradeoﬀ and can also include trading frictions and constraints. An important case are mean-variance
eﬃcient portfolios with transaction costs and short sale constraints.
An arbitrage allocation is a mapping from R p to R in a function classW , that assigns a weight
wϵ
n,t−1 for the arbitrage portfolio ϵn,t−1 in the investment strategy using only the arbitrage signal
θn,t:
wϵ :θn,t−1→wϵ
n,t−1.
Given a concave utility function U(·), the allocation function is the solution to
max
wϵ∈W,θ∈Θ
E t−1
[
U
(
wR
t−1Rt
)]
(2)
s.t. wR
t−1 = wϵ
t−1
⊤Φt−1
∥wϵ
t−1
⊤Φt−1∥1
and wϵ
t−1 =wϵ(θ(ϵL
t−1)). (3)
In the presence of trading costs, we calculate the expected utility of the portfolio net return by
subtracting from the portfolio return wR
t−1Rt the trading costs that are associated with the stock
allocationwR
t−1. The trading costs can capture the transaction costs from frequent rebalancing and
the higher costs of short selling compared to long positions. The stock weights wR
t−1 are normalized
to add up to one in absolute value, which implicitly imposes a leverage constraint. The conditional
expectation uses the general ﬁltration Ft−1.
This is a combined optimization problem, which simultaneously solves for the optimal allocation
function and arbitrage signal function. As the weight is a composition of the two functions, i.e.
wϵ
t−1 = wϵ(θ(ϵL
t−1)), the decomposition into a signal and allocation function is in general not
uniquely identiﬁed. This means there can be multiple representations of θ andwϵ, that will result
in the same trading policy. We use a decomposition that allows us to compare the problem to
classical arbitrage approaches, for which this separation is uniquely identiﬁed. The key feature of
the signal functionθ is that it models a time-series, that means it is a mapping that explicitly models
10

## Page 12

the temporal order and the dependency between the elements of ϵL
t−1. The allocation function wϵ
can be a complex nonlinear function, but does not explicitly model time-series behavior. This
means that wϵ is implicitly limited in the dependency patterns of its input elements that it can
capture.
We will consider arbitrage trading that maximizes the Sharpe ratio or achieves the highest
average return for a given level of variance risk. More speciﬁcally we will solve for
max
wϵ∈W,θ∈Θ
E
[
wR
t−1
⊤Rt
]
√
Var(wR
t−1
⊤Rt)
or max
wϵ∈W,θ∈Θ
E [wR
t−1
⊤
Rt]−γVar(wR
t−1
⊤
Rt) (4)
s.t. wR
t−1 = wϵ
t−1
⊤Φt−1
∥wϵ
t−1
⊤Φt−1∥1
and wϵ
t−1 =wϵ(θ(ϵL
t−1)). (5)
for some risk aversion parameter γ. We will consider this formulation with and without trading
costs.3
Many relevant models estimate the signal and allocation function separately. The arbitrage
signals can be estimated as the parameters of a parametric time-series model, the serial moments
for a given stationary distribution or a time-series ﬁlter. In these cases, the signal estimation solves
a separate optimization problem as part of the estimation. Given the signals, the allocation function
is the solution of
max
wϵ∈W
E t−1
[
U
(
wR
t−1Rt
)]
s.t. wR
t−1 = wϵ(θt−1)⊤Φt−1
∥wϵ(θt−1)⊤Φt−1∥1
. (6)
We provide an extensive study of the importance of the diﬀerent elements in statistical arbitrage
trading. We ﬁnd that the most important driver for proﬁtable portfolios is the arbitrage signal
function; that is, a good model to extract time-series behavior and to time the predictable mean
reversion patterns is essential. The arbitrage portfolios of asset pricing models that are suﬃciently
rich result in roughly the same performance. Once an informative signal is extracted, parametric
and nonparametric allocation functions can take advantage of it. We ﬁnd that the key element is
to consider a suﬃciently general class of functions Θ for the arbitrage signal and to estimate the
signal that is the most relevant for trading. In other words, the largest gains in statistical arbitrage
come from ﬂexible time-series signals θ and a joint optimization problem.
D. Models for Arbitrage Signal and Allocation Functions
In this section we introduce diﬀerent functional models for the signal and allocation functions.
They range from the most restrictive assumptions for simple parametric models to the most ﬂexible
model, which is our sophisticated deep neural network architecture. The general problem is the
estimation of a signal and allocation function given the residual time-series. Here, we take the
3While the conventional mean-variance optimization applies a penalty to the variance, we found that it is numer-
ically beneﬁcial to use the standard deviation instead. Both formulations describe the same fundamental trade-oﬀ.
11

## Page 13

Figure 1: Conceptual Arbitrage Model
This ﬁgure illustrates the conceptual structure of our statistical arbitrage framework. The model takes as input the last L
cumulative returns of a residual portfolio on a lookback window at a given time and outputs the predicted optimal allocation
weight for that residual for the next time. The model is composed of a signal extraction function and an allocation function.
residual returns as given, i.e. we have selected an asset pricing model. In order to illustrate the
key elements of the allocation functions, we consider trading the residuals directly. Projecting the
residuals back into the original return space is identical for the diﬀerent methods and discussed in
the empirical part. The conceptual steps are illustrated in Figure 1.
The input to the signal extraction functions are the last L cumulative residuals. We simplify
the notation by dropping the time index t− 1 and the asset index n and deﬁne the generic input
vector
x := Int
(
ϵL
n,t−1
)
=
(
ϵn,t−L
∑2
l=1ϵn,t−L−1+l ··· ∑L
l=1ϵn,t−L−1+l
)
.
Here the operation Int(·) simply integrates a discrete time-series. We can view the cumulative
residuals as the residual “price” process. We discuss three diﬀerent classes of models for the signal
function θ that vary in the degree of ﬂexibility of the type of patterns that they can capture.
Similarly, we consider diﬀerent classes of models for the allocation function wϵ.
D.1. Parametric Models
Our ﬁrst benchmark method is a parametric model and corresponds to classical mean-reversion
trading. In this framework, the cumulative residuals x are assumed to be the discrete realizations
of continuous time model:
x =
(
X1 ··· XL
)
.
Following the inﬂuential papers by Avellaneda and Lee (2010) and Yeo and Papanicolaou (2017)
we model Xt as an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process
dXt =κ (µ−Xt)dt +σdBt
12

## Page 14

for a Brownian motion Bt. These are the standard models for mean-reversion trading and Avel-
laneda and Lee (2010) among others have shown their good empirical performance.
The parameters of this model are estimated from the moments of the discretized time-series, as
described in detail along with the other implementation details in Appendix B.B. The parameters
for each residual process, the last cumulative sum and a goodness of ﬁt measure form the signals
for the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model:
θOU =
(
ˆκ ˆµ ˆσ X L R2
)
.
Following Yeo and Papanicolaou (2017) we also include the goodness of ﬁt parameter R2 as part of
the signal. R2 has the conventional deﬁnition of the ratio of squared values explained by the model
normalized by total squared values. If the R2 value is too low, the predictions of the model seem
to be unreliable, which can be taken into account in a trading policy. Hence, for each cumulative
residual vector ϵL
n,t−1 we obtain the signal
θOU
n,t−1 =
(
ˆκn,t−1 ˆµn,t−1 ˆσn,t−1
∑L
l=1ϵn,t−1+l R2
n,t−1
)
.
Avellaneda and Lee (2010) and Yeo and Papanicolaou (2017) advocate a classical mean-reversion
thresholding rule, which implies the following allocation function 4:
wϵ|OU(
θOU)
=



−1 if XL−µ
σ/
√
2κ >c thresh and R2>c crit
1 if XL−µ
σ/
√
2κ <−cthresh and R2>c crit
0 otherwise
The threshold parameters cthresh and ccrit are tuning parameters. The strategy suggests to buy
or sell residuals based on the ratio XL−µ
σ/
√
2κ. If this ratio exceeds a threshold, it is likely that the
process reverts back to its long term mean, which starts the trading. If the R2 value is too low, the
predictions of the model seem to be unreliable, which stops the trading. This will be our parametric
benchmark model. It has a parametric model for both the signal and allocation function.
Figure A.2 in the Appendix illustrates this model with an empirical example. In this ﬁgure
we show the allocation weights and signals of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck with threshold model as
well as the more ﬂexible models that we are going to discuss next. The models are estimated
on the empirical data, and the residual is a representative empirical example. In more detail, we
consider the residuals from ﬁve IPCA factors and estimate the benchmark models as explained in
the empirical Section III.N. The left subplots display the cumulative residual process along with the
out-of-sample allocation weightswϵ
l that each model assigns to this speciﬁc residual. The evaluation
of this illustrative example is a simpliﬁcation of the general model that we use in our empirical main
analysis. In this example, we consider trading only this speciﬁc residual and hence normalize the
4The allocation function is derived by maximizing an expected trading proﬁt. This deviates slightly from our
objective of either maximizing the Sharpe ratio or the expected return subject to a variance penalty. As this is the
most common arbitrage trading rule, we include it as a natural benchmark.
13

## Page 15

weights to{−1, 0, 1}. In our empirical analysis we trade all residuals and map them back into the
original stock returns. The middle column shows the time-series of estimated out-of-sample signals
for each model, by applying the θl arbitrage signal function to the previous L = 30 cumulative
returns of the residual. The right column displays the out-of-sample cumulative returns of trading
this particular residual based on the corresponding allocation weights.
The last row in Figure A.2 shows the results for the OU+Threshold model. The cumulative
return of trading this residual is negative, suggesting that the parametric model fails. The residual
time-series with the corresponding allocation weights in subplot (g) explain why. The trading
allocation does not assign a positive weight during the uptrend and wrongly assigns a constant
negative weight, when the residual price process follows a mean-reversion pattern with positive and
negative returns. A parametric model can break down if it is misspeciﬁed. This is not only the case
for trend patterns, but also if there are multiple mean reversion patterns of diﬀerent frequencies.
Subplot (h) shows the signal. 5 We see that changes in the allocation function are related to sharp
changes in at least one of the signals, but overall, the signal does not seem to represent the complex
price patterns of the residual.
A natural generalization is to allow for a more ﬂexible allocation function given the same time-
series signals. We will consider for all our models also a general feedforward neural network (FFN)
to map the signal into an allocation weight. FFNs are nonparametric estimators that can capture
very general functional relationships. 6 Hence, we also consider the additional model that restricts
the signal function, but allows for a ﬂexible allocation function:
wϵ|OU-FFN(
θOU)
=gFFN(
θOU)
.
We will show empirically that the gains of a ﬂexible allocation function are minor relative to the
very simple parametric model.
D.2. Pre-Speciﬁed Filters
As a generalization of the restrictive parametric model of the last subsection, we consider
more general time-series models. Many relevant time-series models can be formulated as ﬁltering
problems. Filters are transformations of time-series that provide an alternative representation of
the original time-series which emphasizes certain dynamic patterns.
A time-invariant linear ﬁlter can be formulated as
θl =
L∑
j=1
W ﬁlter
j xj,
5For better readability we have scaled the parameters of the OU process by a factor of ﬁve, but this still represents
the same model as the scaling cancels out in the allocation function. As a minor modiﬁcation, we use the ratio
σ/
√
2κ as a signal instead of two individual parameters, as the conventional regression estimator of the OU process
directly provides the ratio, but requires additional moments for the individual parameters. However, this results in
an equivalent presentation of the model as only the ratio enters the allocation function.
6Appendix B.A provides the details for estimating a FFN as a functional mapping gFFN : R p→ R .
14

## Page 16

which is a linear mapping from R L into R L with the matrix W ﬁlter ∈ R L×L. The estimation
of causal ARMA processes is an example for such ﬁlters. A spectral decomposition based on a
frequency ﬁlter is the most relevant ﬁlter for our problem of ﬁnding mean reversion patterns.
A Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) provides a frequency decomposition of the original time-series
and separates the movements into mean reverting processes of diﬀerent frequencies. FFT applies
the ﬁlter W FFT
j = e
2πi
L j in the complex plane, but for real-valued time-series it is equivalent to
ﬁtting the following model:
xl =a0 +
L/2−1∑
j=1
(
aj· cos
(2πj
L l
)
+bj· sin
(2πj
L l
))
+aL/2cos (πl).
The FFT representation is given by coeﬃcients of the trigonometric representation
θFFT =
(
a0 ··· aL/2 b1 ··· bL/2−1
)
∈ R L.
The coeﬃcientsal andbl can be interpreted as “loadings” or exposure to long or short-term reversal
patterns. Note that the FFT is an invertible transformation. Hence, it simply represents the original
time-series in a diﬀerent form without losing any information. It is based on the insight that not
the magnitude of the original data but the relative relationship in a time-series matters.
We use a ﬂexible feedforward neural network for the allocation function
wϵ|FFT(
θFFT)
=gFFN(
θFFT)
.
The usual intuition behind ﬁltering is to use the frequency representation to cut oﬀ frequencies
that have low coeﬃcients and therefore remove noise in the representation. The FFN is essentially
implementing this ﬁltering step of removing less important frequencies.
We illustrate the model within our running example in Figure A.2. The middle row shows the
results for the FFT+FFN model. The cumulative residual in subplot (d) seems to be a combination
of low and high-frequency movements with an initial trend component. The signal in subplot (e)
suggests that the FFT ﬁlter seems to capture the low frequency reversal pattern. However, it
misses the high-frequency components as indicated by the simplistic allocation function. The
trading strategy takes a long position for the ﬁrst half and a short position for the second part.
While this simple allocation results in a positive cumulative return, in this example it neglects the
more complex local reversal patterns.
While the FFT framework is an improvement over the simple OU model as it can deal with
multiple combined mean-reversion patterns of diﬀerent frequencies, it fails if the data follows a
pattern that cannot be well approximated by a small number of the pre-speciﬁed basis functions.
For completeness, our empirical analysis will also report the case of a trivial ﬁlter, which simply
15

## Page 17

takes the residuals as signals, and combines them with a general allocation function:
θident(x) =x =θident
wϵ|FFN
(
θident
)
=gFFN (x).
This is a good example to emphasize the importance of a time-series model. While FFNs are
ﬂexible in learning low dimensional functional relationships, they are limited in learning a complex
dependency model. For example, the FFN architecture we consider is not suﬃciently ﬂexible
to learn the FFT transformation and hence has a worse performance on the original time-series
compared to frequency-transformed time-series. While Xiaohong Chen and White (1999) have
shown that FFNs are “universal approximators” of low-dimensional functional relationships, they
also show that FFN can suﬀer from a curse of dimensionality when capturing complex dependencies
between the input. Although the time domain and frequency domain representations of the input
are equivalent under the Fourier transform, clearly the time-series model implied by the frequency
domain representation allows for a more eﬀective learning of an arbitrage policy. However, the
choice of the pre-speciﬁed ﬁlter limits the time-series patterns that can be exploited. The solution
is our data driven ﬁlter presented in the next section.
D.3. Convolutional Neural Network with Transformer
Our benchmark machine learning model is a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) combined
with a Transformer. It uses the most advanced state-of-the art machine learning tools tailored to
our problem. Convolutional networks are in fact the most successful networks for computer vision,
i.e. for pattern detection. Transformers have rapidly become the model of choice for sequence
modeling such as Natural Language Processing (NLP) problems, replacing older recurrent neural
network models such as the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network.
The CNN and transformer framework has two key elements: (1) Local ﬁlters and (2) the
temporal combination of these local ﬁlters. The CNN can be interpreted as a set of data driven
ﬂexible local ﬁlters. A transformer can be viewed as a data driven ﬂexible time-series model to
capture complex dependencies between local patterns. We use the CNN+Transformer to generate
the time-series signal. The allocation function is then modeled as a ﬂexible data driven allocation
with an FFN.
The CNN estimates D local ﬁlters of size Dsize:
y(0)
l =
Dsize∑
m=1
W (0)
m xl−m+1
for a matrix W (0)∈ R Dsize×D. The local ﬁlters are a mapping from x∈ R L to y(0)∈ R L×D given
by the convolution y(0) = W (0)∗x. Figure 2 shows examples of these local ﬁlters for Dsize = 3.
The values of y(0) can be interpreted as the “loadings” or exposure to local basis patterns. For
16

## Page 18

Figure 2: Examples of Local Filters
(a) Upward trend
 (b) Downward trend
 (c) Up reversal
 (d) Down reversal
These ﬁgures show the most important local ﬁlters estimated for the benchmark model in our empirical analysis. These are
projections of our higher dimensional nonlinear ﬁlter from a 2-layer CNN into two-dimensional linear ﬁlters.
example, if x represents a global upward trend, its ﬁltered representation should have mainly large
values for the local upward trend ﬁlter.
The convolutional mapping can be repeated in multiple layers to obtain a multi-layer CNN.
First, the output of the ﬁrst layer of the CNN is transformed nonlinearly by applying the ReLU( ·)
function:
x(1)
l,d = ReLU
(
y(0)
l,d
)
:= max(y(0)
l,d, 0).
The second layer is given by a higher dimensional ﬁltering projection:
y(2)
l,d =
Dsize∑
m=1
D∑
j=1
W (1)
d,j,mx(1)
l−m+1,j,
x(2)
l,d = ReLU
(
y(1)
l,d
)
.
The ﬁnal output of the CNN is ˜ x∈ R L×D. Our benchmark model is a 2-layered convolutional
neural network. The number of layers is a hyperparameter selected on the validation data. Figure
3 illustrates the structure of the 2-layer CNN. While this description captures all the conceptual
elements, the actual implementation includes additional details, such as bias terms, instance nor-
malization and residual connection to improve the implementation as explained in Appendix B.C.
For a 1-layer CNN without the ﬁnal nonlinear transformation, i.e. for a simple local linear ﬁlter,
the patterns can be visualized by the vectors W (0)
m . In our case of a 2-layer CNN the local ﬁlter
can capture more complex patterns as it applies a 3-dimensional weighting scheme in the array
W (1) and nonlinear transformations. In order to visualize the type of patterns, we project the local
ﬁlter into a simple local linear ﬁlter. We want to ﬁnd the basic patterns that activate only one of
the D ﬁlters, but none of the others, i.e. we are looking for an orthogonal representation of the
projection.7
7A local ﬁlter can be formalized as a mapping from the local Dsize points of a sequence to the activation of the
D ﬁlters: φ : R Dsize→ R D. Denote by ed∈ R D a vector that is 0 everywhere except for the value 1 at position d,
i.e. ed =
(
0 ··· 1 0 ··· 0
)
. Fundamentally, we want to invert the local ﬁlter to obtain φ−1(ed) to ﬁnd the local
sequences that only activates ﬁlter d. In general, the inverse is a set and not unique. Our example basic patterns in
17

## Page 19

Figure 3: Convolutional Network Architecture
This ﬁgure shows the structure of our convolutional network. The network takes as input a window of L consecutive daily
cumulative returns a residual, and outputsD features for each block ofDsize days. Each of the features is a nonlinear function
of the observations in the block, and captures a common pattern.
The example plots for local ﬁlters in Figure 2 are projections of our higher dimensional nonlinear
ﬁlter into two-dimensional linear ﬁlters. The examples show some of the most important local
ﬁlters for our empirical benchmark model. While these projections are of course not complete
representations of the nonlinear ﬁlters of the CNN, they provide an intuition for the type of patterns
which are activated by speciﬁc ﬁlters. Our 2-layer CNN network has a local window size ofDsize = 2,
but because of the 2-layer structure it captures information from two neighboring points. Hence,
the projection on a one-dimensional linear ﬁlter has a local window size of three as depicted in
Figure 2.
The output of the CNN ˜x∈ R L×D is used as an input to the transformer. The CNN projection
provides a more informative representation of the dynamics than the original time-series as it
captures the relative local dependencies between data points. However, by construction the CNN
is only a local representation, and we need the transformer network to detect the global patterns.
A transformer network is a model of temporal dependencies between local ﬁlters. Given the local
structure ˜x the transformer estimates the temporal interactions between the L diﬀerent blocks by
computing a “global pattern projection”:
Assume there are H diﬀerent global patterns. The transformer will calculate projections on
these H patterns with the “attention weights”. We ﬁrst introduce a simpliﬁed linear projection
model before extending it to the actual transformer. For each of the i = 1,...,H patterns we have
projections deﬁned by αi∈ R L×L:
hsimple
i =
L∑
j=1
αi,j ˜xj for i = 1,..,H.
Figure 2 solve
argminxloc,d∈R Dsize∥φ(xloc,d)−ed∥2 for d = 1,...,D .
18

## Page 20

The “attention function” αi(.,. )∈ [0, 1] captures dependencies between the last local patterns ˜xL
and the prior local patterns ˜xj:
αi,j =αi (˜xL, ˜xj) for i = 1,...,H.
Each projection hsimple
i is called an “attention head”. These attention heads hsimple
i could be
interpreted as “loadings” or “exposure” for a speciﬁc “pattern factor” αi. For example, a global
upward trend can be captured by an attention function that puts weight on subsequent local upward
trends. Another example would be sinusoidal mean reversion patterns which would put weights on
alternating “curved” local basis patterns. The projection on these weights captures how much a
speciﬁc time-series ˜x is exposed to this global pattern. Hence, hsimple
i measures the exposure to the
global pattern i of the time-series ˜x. Each attention head can focus on a speciﬁc global pattern,
which we then combine to obtain our signal.
The fundamental challenge is to learn attention functions that can model complex dependencies.
The crucial innovation in transformers is their modeling of the attention functionsαi and attention
heads hi. In order to deal with the high dimensionality of the problem, transformers consider
lower dimensional projections of ˜x into R D/H and use the lower-dimensional scaled dot product
attention mechanism for αi as explained in Appendix B.C. More speciﬁcally, each attention head
hi∈ R L×D/H is based on 8 the projected input ˜xWV
i with WV
i ∈ R D×D/H and αi∈ R L×L:
hi =αi˜xWV
i for i = 1,..,H.
The projection on all global basis patterns h∈ R L×D/H is given by a weighted linear combination
of the diﬀerent attention heads
hproj =
(
h1 ··· hH
)
WO
with WO∈ R D×D. This ﬁnal projection can, for example, model a combination of a global trend
and mean reversion patterns. In conclusion, hproj represents the time-series in terms of the H
global patterns. This is analogous to a Fourier ﬁlter, but without pre-specifying the global patterns
a priori. All parts of the CNN+Transformer network, i.e. the local patterns, the attention functions
and the projections on global patterns, are estimated from the data.
The trading signal θCNN+Trans equals the global pattern projection for the ﬁnal cumulative
return projection 9 hproj
L :
θCNN+Trans =hproj
L ∈ R H,
8The actual implementation also includes bias terms which we neglect here for simplicity. The Appendix provides
the implementation details.
9In principle, we can use the complete matrix h∈ R L×D as the signal. However, conceptually the global pattern
at the end of the time period should be the most relevant for the next realization of the process. We have also
implemented a transformer that uses the full matrix, with similar results and the variable importance rankings
suggest that only hL is selected in the allocation function.
19

## Page 21

Figure 4: Transformer Network Architecture
This ﬁgure shows the structure of our transformer network. The model takes as input the matrix ˜ x∈ RL×D that we obtain
as output of the convolutional network depicted in Figure 3, which contains D features for each of the L blocks of the original
time series. These features are projected onto H attention heads, which capture the global temporal dependency patterns.
The projections on these attention heads represent our arbitrage signals, which are the input to the feedforward network that
estimates the allocation weight for the residual on the next day.
which is then used as input to a time-wise feedforward network allocation function
wϵ|CNN+Trans(
θCNN+Trans)
=gFFN(
θCNN+Trans)
.
The separation between signal and allocation is not uniquely identiﬁed as we use a joint optimization
problem. We have chosen a separation that maps naturally into the classical examples considered
in the previous subsections. Figure 4 illustrates the transformer network architecture. We have
presented a 1-layer transformer network, which is our benchmark model. The transformed data
can be used as input in more iterations of the transformer to obtain a multi-layer transformer.
We illustrate the CNN+Transformer model in the ﬁrst row of Figure A.2 in the Appendix for
an empirical residual example. First, it is apparent that the cumulative returns of the strategy in
subplot (c) outperforms the previous two models. This is because the allocation weights in subplot
(a) capture not only the low frequency reversal patterns, but also the high-frequency cycles and
trend components. This also implies that the allocation weights change more frequently to capture
the higher frequency components. This more sophisticated allocation function requires a more
complex signal as illustrated in subplot (b). Each change in the allocation can be traced back to
changes in at least one of the signals. While the signals themselves are hard to interpret, we will
leverage the transformer structure to extract interpretable “global dependency factors” in our main
analysis. Figure A.3 in the Appendix provides another example to illustrate the diﬀerences between
the three models. This example has a strong negative trend component with a superimposed mean-
20

## Page 22

reversion. Only the CNN+Transformer captures both type of patterns.
III. Empirical Analysis
A. Data
We collect daily equity return data for the securities on CRSP from January 1978 through
December 2016. We use the ﬁrst part of the sample to estimate the various factor models, which
gives us the residuals for the time period from January 1998 to December 2016 for the arbitrage
trading. The arbitrage strategies trade on a daily frequency at the close of each day. We use the
daily adjusted returns to account for dividends and splits and the one-month Treasury bill rates
from the Kenneth French Data Library as the risk-free rate. In addition, we complement the stock
returns with the 46 ﬁrm-speciﬁc characteristics from Chen et al. (2022), which are listed in Table
A.I. All these variables are constructed either from accounting variables from the CRSP/Compustat
database or from past returns from CRSP. The full details on the construction of these variables
are in the Internet Appendix of Chen et al. (2022).
Our analysis uses only the most liquid stocks in order to avoid trading and market friction
issues. More speciﬁcally, we consider only the stocks whose market capitalization at the previous
month was larger than 0.01% of the total market capitalization at that previous month, which is
the same selection criterion as in Kozak et al. (2020). On average this leaves us with approximately
the largest 550 stocks, which correspond roughly to the S&P 500 index. This is an unbalanced
dataset, as the stocks that we consider each month need not be the same as in the next month,
but it is essentially balanced on a daily frequency in rolling windows of up to one year in our
trading period from 1998 through 2016. For each stock we have its cross-sectionally centered and
rank-transformed characteristics of the previous month. This is a standard transformation to deal
with the diﬀerent scales which is robust to outliers and time-variation, and has also been used in
Chen et al. (2022), Kozak et al. (2020), Kelly et al. (2019), and Freyberger et al. (2020).
Our daily residual time-series start in 1998 as we have a large number of missing values in daily
individual stock returns prior to this date, but almost no missing daily values in our sample. 10 We
want to point out that the time period after 1998 also seems to be more challenging for arbitrage
trading or factor trading, and hence our results can be viewed as conservative lower bounds.
B. Factor model estimation
As discussed in Section II.A, we construct the statistical arbitrage portfolios by using the resid-
uals of a general factor model for the daily excess returns of a collection of stocks. In particular,
we consider the three empirically most successful families of factor models in our implementation.
10Of all the stocks that have daily returns observed in a the local lockback window of L = 30 days, only 0.1% have
a missing return the next day for the out-of-sample trading, in which case we do not trade this stock. Hence, our
data set of stocks with market capitalization higher than 0.01% of the total market capitalization, has essentially no
missing daily values on a local window for the time period after 1998.
21

## Page 23

For each family, we conduct a rolling window estimation to obtain daily residuals out of sample
from 1998 through 2016. This means that the residual composition matrix Φ t−1 of equation (1)
depends only on the information up to time t− 1, and hence there is no look-ahead bias in trading
the residuals. The rolling window estimation is necessary because of the time-variation in risk
exposure of individual stocks and the unbalanced nature of a panel of individuals stock returns.
The three classes of factor models consists of pre-speciﬁed factors, latent unconditional factors
and latent conditional factors:
1. Fama-French factors: We consider 1, 3, 5 and 8 factors based on various versions and
extensions of the Fama-French factor models and downloaded from the Kenneth French Data
Library. We consider them as tradeable assets in our universe. Each model includes the
previous one and adds additional characteristic-based risk factors:
(a) K = 1: CAPM model with the excess return of a market factor
(b) K = 3: Fama-French 3 factor model includes a market, size and value factor
(c) K = 5: Fama-French 3 factor model + investment and proﬁtability factors
(d) K = 8: Fama-French 5 factor model + momentum, short-term reversal and long-term
reversal factors.
We estimate the loadings of the individual stock returns daily with a linear regression on
the factors with a rolling window on the previous 60 days and compute the residual for the
current day out-of-sample. This is the same procedure as in Carhart (1997). At each day
we only consider the stocks with no missing observations in the daily returns within the
rolling window, which in any window removes at most 2% of the stocks given our market
capitalization ﬁlter.
2. PCA factors: We consider 1, 3, 5, 8, 10, and 15 latent factors, which are estimated daily
on a rolling window. At each time t− 1, we use the last 252 days, or roughly one trading
year, to estimate the correlation matrix from which we extract the PCA factors. 11 Then, we
use the last 60 days to estimate the loadings on the latent factors using linear regressions,
and compute residuals for the current day out-of-sample. At each day we only consider the
stocks with no missing observations in the daily returns during the rolling window, which in
any window removes at most 2% of the stocks given our market capitalization ﬁlter.
3. IPCA factors: We consider 1, 3, 5, 8, 10, and 15 factors in the Instrumented PCA (IPCA)
model of Kelly et al. (2019). This is a conditional latent factor model, in which the loadings
βt−1 are a linear function of the asset characteristics at time t− 1. As the characteristics
change at most each month, we reestimate the IPCA model on rolling window every year
using the monthly returns and characteristics of the last 240 months. The IPCA provides the
factor weights and loadings for each stock as a function of the stock characteristics. Hence,
we do not need to estimate the loadings for individual stocks with an additional time-series
regression, but use the loading function and the characteristics at time t− 1 to obtain the
11This is the same procedure as in Avellaneda and Lee (2010).
22

## Page 24

out-of-sample residuals at time t. The other details of the estimation process are carried out
in the way outlined in Kelly et al. (2019).
In addition to the factor models above, we also include the excess returns of the individual stocks
without projecting out the factors. This “zero-factor model” simply consists of the original excess
returns of stocks in our universe and is denoted as K = 0. For each factor model, in our empirical
analysis we observe that the cumulative residuals exhibit consistent and relatively regular mean-
reverting behavior. After taking out suﬃciently many factors, the residuals of diﬀerent stocks are
only weakly correlated.
C. Implementation
Given the daily out-of-sample residuals from 1998 through 2016 we estimate the trading signal
and policy on a rolling window to obtain the out-of-sample returns of the strategy. For each strategy
we calculate the annualized sample mean µ, annualized volatility σ and annualized Sharpe ratio 12
SR = µ
σ. The Sharpe ratio represents a risk-adjusted average return. Our main models estimate
arbitrage strategies to maximize the Sharpe ratio without transaction costs. In Section III.E we
also consider a mean-variance objective and in Section III.J we include transaction costs in the
estimation and evaluation.
Our strategies trade the residuals of all stocks, which are mapped back into positions of the
original stocks. We use the standard normalization that the absolute values of the individual stock
portfolio weights sums up to one, i.e. we use the normalization ∥ωR
t−1∥1 = 1. This normalization
implies a leverage constraint as short positions are bounded by one. The trading signal is based on
a local lookback window of L = 30 days. We show in Section III.I, that the results are robust to
this choice and are very comparable for a lookback window of L = 60 days. Our main results use a
rolling window of 1,000 days to estimate the deep learning models. For computational reasons we
re-estimate the network only every 125 days using the previous 1,000 days. Section III.I shows that
our results are robust to this choice. Our main results show the out-of-sample trading performance
from January 2002 to December 2016 as we use the ﬁrst four years to estimate the signal and
allocation function.
The hyperparameters for the deep learning models are based on the validation results summa-
rized in Appendix C.A. Our benchmark model is a 2-layer CNN with D = 8 local convolutional
ﬁlters and local window size of Dsize = 2 days. The transformer has H = 4 attention heads, which
can be interpreted as capturing four diﬀerent global patterns. The results are extremely robust to
the choice of hyperparameters. Appendix B.D includes all the technical details for implementing
the deep learning models.
12We obtain the annualized metrics from the daily returns using the standard calculations µ = 252
T
∑T
t=1Rt and
σ =
√
252
T
∑T
t=1(Rt−µ)2.
23

## Page 25

Table I: OOS Annualized Performance Based on Sharpe Ratio Objective
Factors Fama-French PCA IPCA
Model K SR µ σ SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 1.64 13.7% 8.4% 1.64 13.7% 8.4% 1.64 13.7% 8.4%
1 3.68 7.2% 2.0% 2.74 15.2% 5.5% 3.22 8.7% 2.7%
CNN 3 3.13 5.5% 1.8% 3.56 16.0% 4.5% 3.93 8.6% 2.2%
+ 5 3.21 4.6% 1.4% 3.36 14.3% 4.2% 4.16 8.7% 2.1%
Trans 8 2.49 3.4% 1.4% 3.02 12.2% 4.0% 3.95 8.2% 2.1%
10 - - - 2.81 10.7% 3.8% 3.97 8.0% 2.0%
15 - - - 2.30 7.6% 3.3% 4.17 8.4% 2.0%
0 0.36 4.9% 13.6% 0.36 4.9% 13.6% 0.36 4.9% 13.6%
1 0.89 3.2% 3.5% 0.80 8.4% 10.6% 1.24 6.3% 5.0%
Fourier 3 1.32 3.5% 2.7% 1.66 11.2% 6.7% 1.77 7.8% 4.4%
+ 5 1.66 3.1% 1.8% 1.98 12.4% 6.3% 1.90 7.7% 4.1%
FFN 8 1.90 3.1% 1.6% 1.95 10.1% 5.2% 1.94 7.8% 4.0%
10 - - - 1.71 8.2% 4.8% 1.93 7.6% 3.9%
15 - - - 1.14 4.8% 4.2% 2.06 7.9% 3.8%
0 -0.18 -2.4% 13.3% -0.18 -2.4% 13.3% -0.18 -2.4% 13.3%
1 0.16 0.6% 3.8% 0.21 2.1% 10.4% 0.60 3.0% 5.1%
OU 3 0.54 1.6% 3.0% 0.77 5.2% 6.8% 0.88 3.8% 4.3%
+ 5 0.38 0.9% 2.3% 0.73 4.4% 6.1% 0.97 3.8% 4.0%
Thresh 8 1.16 2.8% 2.4% 0.87 4.4% 5.1% 0.91 3.5% 3.8%
10 - - - 0.63 2.9% 4.6% 0.86 3.1% 3.6%
15 - - - 0.62 2.4% 3.8% 0.93 3.2% 3.5%
This table shows the out-of-sample annualized Sharpe ratio (SR), mean return ( µ), and volatility (σ) of our three statistical
arbitrage models for diﬀerent numbers of risk factors K, that we use to obtain the residuals. We use the daily out-of-
sample residuals from January 1998 to December 2016 and evaluate the out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 2002 to
December 2016. CNN+Trans denotes the convolutional network with transformer model, Fourier+FFN estimates the signal
with a FFT and the policy with a feedforward neural network and lastly, OU+Thres is the parametric Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
model with thresholding trading policy. The two deep learning models are calibrated on a rolling window of four years and
use the Sharpe ratio objective function. The signals are extracted from a rolling window of L = 30 days. The K = 0 factor
model corresponds to directly using stock returns instead of residuals for the signal and trading policy.
D. Main Results
Table I displays the main results for various arbitrage models. It reports the annualized Sharpe
ratio, mean return and volatility for our principal deep trading strategy CNN+Transformer and
the two benchmark models, Fourier+FFN and OU+Threshold, for every factor model described in
Section III.B. The CNN+Transformer model and Fourier+FFN model are estimated with a Sharpe
ratio objective. We obtain the daily out-of-sample residuals for diﬀerent number of factors K for
the time period January 1998 to December 2016. The daily returns of the out-of-sample arbitrage
trading is then evaluated from January 2002 to December 2016, as we use a rolling window of four
years to estimate the deep learning models.
First, we conﬁrm that it is crucial to apply arbitrage trading to residuals and not individual
stock returns. The stock returns, denoted as the K = 0 model, perform substantially worse than
any type of residual within the same model and factor family. This is not surprising as residuals
24

## Page 26

for an appropriate factor model are expected to be better described by a model that captures mean
reversion. Importantly, individual stock returns are highly correlated and a substantial part of the
returns is driven by the low dimensional factor component. 13 Hence, the complex nonparametric
models are actually not estimated on many weakly dependent residual time-series, but most time-
series have redundant information. In other words, the models are essentially calibrated on only
a few factor time-series, which severely limits the structure that can be estimated. However, once
we extract around K = 5 factors with any of the diﬀerent factor models, the performance does not
substantially increase by adding more factors. This suggests that most of commonality is explained
by a small number of factors.
Second, the CNN+Transformer model strongly dominates the other benchmark models in terms
of Sharpe ratio and average return. The Sharpe ratio is approximately twice as large as for a compa-
rable Fourier+FFN model and four times higher for the corresponding parametric OU+Threshold
model. Using IPCA residuals, the CNN+Transformer achieves the impressive out-of-sample Sharpe
ratio of around 4, in spite of trading only the most liquid large cap stocks and the time period after
2002. The mean returns of the CNN+Transformer are similar to the Fourier+FFN model, but
have substantially smaller volatilities, which results in the higher Sharpe ratios. The parametric
mean-reversion model achieves positive mean returns with Sharpe ratios close to one for the IPCA
residuals, but as expected is too restrictive relative to the ﬂexible models. The Fourier+FFN has
the same ﬂexibility as the CNN+Transformer in its allocation function, but is restricted to a pre-
speciﬁed signal structure. The diﬀerence in performance quantiﬁes the importance of extracting
the complex time-series signals.
Third, the average return of the arbitrage strategies is large in spite of the leverage constraints.
Normalizing the individual stock weights wR
t−1 so sum up in absolute value to one limits the short-
selling. The CNN+Transformer with a ﬁve-factor PCA residual achieves an attractive annual
mean return of around 14%. This means that the strategies do not require an infeasible amount of
leverage to yield an average return that might be required by investors. In other words, the high
Sharpe ratios are not the results of vanishing volatility but a combination of high average returns
with moderate volatility.
Fourth, the arbitrage strategies are qualitatively robust to the choice of factor models to obtain
residuals. The Fama-French and PCA factor lead to very similar Sharpe ratio results, suggesting
that they explain a similar amount of co-movement in the data. However, as the mean returns
of PCA factors are usually higher than the mean returns of the Fama-French factors, the risk
factors are diﬀerent. This conﬁrms the ﬁndings of Pelger (2020) and Lettau and Pelger (2020b),
who show that PCA factors do not coincide with Fama-French type factors and explain diﬀerent
mean returns. The IPCA factors use the additional ﬁrm-speciﬁc characteristic information. The
resulting residuals achieve the highest Sharpe ratios, which illustrates that conditional factor models
can capture more information than unconditional models. Including the momentum and reversal
13Pelger (2020) shows that around one third of the individual stock returns is explained by a latent four-factor
model.
25

## Page 27

Table II: Signiﬁcance of Arbitrage Alphas based on Sharpe Ratio Objective
CNN+Trans model
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ
0 11.6% 6.4∗∗∗ 30.3% 13.7% 6.3∗∗∗ 11.6% 6.4∗∗∗ 30.3% 13.7% 6.3∗∗∗ 11.6% 6.4∗∗∗ 30.3% 13.7% 6.3∗∗∗
1 7.0% 14 ∗∗∗ 2.4% 7.2% 14 ∗∗∗ 14.9% 10∗∗∗ 0.6% 15.2% 11 ∗∗∗ 8.1% 12 ∗∗∗ 9.5% 8.7% 12 ∗∗∗
3 5.5% 12 ∗∗∗ 1.2% 5.5% 12 ∗∗∗ 15.8% 14∗∗∗ 1.7% 16.0% 14 ∗∗∗ 8.2% 15 ∗∗∗ 6.0% 8.6% 15 ∗∗∗
5 4.5% 12 ∗∗∗ 2.3% 4.6% 12 ∗∗∗ 14.1% 13∗∗∗ 1.3% 14.3% 13 ∗∗∗ 8.3% 16 ∗∗∗ 3.9% 8.7% 16 ∗∗∗
8 3.3% 9.4∗∗∗ 2.1% 3.4% 9.6 ∗∗∗ 12.0% 12∗∗∗ 0.9% 12.2% 12 ∗∗∗ 7.8% 15 ∗∗∗ 5.0% 8.2% 15 ∗∗∗
10 - - - - - 10.5% 11∗∗∗ 0.7% 10.7% 11 ∗∗∗ 7.7% 15 ∗∗∗ 4.0% 8.0% 15 ∗∗∗
15 - - - - - 7.5% 8.8∗∗∗ 0.5% 7.6% 8.9 ∗∗∗ 8.1% 16 ∗∗∗ 4.2% 8.4% 16 ∗∗∗
Fourier+FFN model
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ
0 2.7% 0.8 8.6% 4.9% 1.4 2.7% 0.8 8.6% 4.9% 1.4 2.7% 0.8 8.6% 4.9% 1.4
1 3.0% 3.3 ∗∗ 3.3% 3.2% 3.5 ∗∗∗ 7.4% 2.7 ∗∗ 3.3% 8.4% 3.1 ∗∗ 4.8% 4.0∗∗∗ 16.4% 6.3% 4.8 ∗∗∗
3 3.2% 4.7∗∗∗ 4.2% 3.5% 5.1 ∗∗∗ 10.9% 6.3∗∗∗ 2.2% 11.2% 6.4 ∗∗∗ 6.8% 6.4∗∗∗ 13.0% 7.8% 6.9 ∗∗∗
5 2.9% 6.1∗∗∗ 3.5% 3.1% 6.4 ∗∗∗ 12.1% 7.5∗∗∗ 1.5% 12.4% 7.6 ∗∗∗ 6.7% 6.9∗∗∗ 13.3% 7.7% 7.4 ∗∗∗
8 3.0% 7.2∗∗∗ 3.2% 3.1% 7.4 ∗∗∗ 10.0% 7.5∗∗∗ 0.9% 10.1% 7.6 ∗∗∗ 6.8% 7.0∗∗∗ 13.3% 7.8% 7.5 ∗∗∗
10 - - - - - 8.0% 6.5∗∗∗ 1.0% 8.2% 6.6 ∗∗∗ 6.8% 7.1∗∗∗ 12.7% 7.6% 7.5 ∗∗∗
15 - - - - - 4.7% 4.3∗∗∗ 0.4% 4.8% 4.4 ∗∗∗ 7.1% 7.6∗∗∗ 12.2% 7.9% 8.0 ∗∗∗
OU+Thresh model
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ
0 -4.5% -1.4 13.4% -2.4% -0.7 -4.5% -1.4 13.4% -2.4% -0.7 -4.5% -1.4 13.4% -2.4% -0.7
1 -0.2% -0.2 13.5% 0.6% 0.6 0.7% 0.3 6.3% 2.1% 0.8 1.7% 1.4 18.9% 3.0% 2.3 ∗
3 0.9% 1.2 10.4% 1.6% 2.1 ∗ 4.3% 2.5 ∗ 4.3% 5.2% 3.0 ∗∗ 2.6% 2.6 ∗∗ 18.8% 3.8% 3.4 ∗∗∗
5 0.5% 0.9 6.8% 0.9% 1.5 3.7% 2.4 ∗ 3.2% 4.4% 2.8 ∗∗ 2.8% 3.0 ∗∗ 17.7% 3.8% 3.8 ∗∗∗
8 0.6% 1.2 5.5% 1.0% 1.9 3.9% 3.0 ∗∗ 1.9% 4.4% 3.4 ∗∗∗ 2.3% 2.6 ∗∗ 17.6% 3.5% 3.6 ∗∗∗
10 - - - - - 2.6% 2.2 ∗ 1.4% 2.9% 2.4 ∗ 2.1% 2.5 ∗ 17.6% 3.1% 3.3 ∗∗∗
15 - - - - - 2.1% 2.1 ∗ 0.7% 2.4% 2.4 ∗ 2.3% 2.8 ∗∗ 18.1% 3.2% 3.6 ∗∗∗
This table shows the out-of-sample pricing errors α of the arbitrage strategies relative of the Fama-French 8 factor model and
their mean returns µ for the diﬀerent arbitrage models and diﬀerent number of factors K that we use to obtain the residuals.
We run a time-series regression of the out-of-sample returns of the arbitrage strategies on the 8-factor model (Fama-French
5 factors + momentum + short-term reversal + long-term reversal) and report the annualized α, accompanying t-statistic
value tα, and the R2 of the regression. In addition, we report the annualized mean return µ along with its accompanying
t-statistic tµ. The hypothesis test are two-sided and stars indicate p-values of 5% ( ∗), 1% (∗∗), and 0.1% (∗∗∗). All results
use the out-of-sample daily returns from January 2002 to December 2016 and the deep learning models are based on a Sharpe
ratio objective.
factors in the Fama-French 8 factor models to obtain residuals still results in proﬁtable arbitrage
strategies. Hence, the arbitrage strategies are not simply capturing a conventional price trend risk
premium.
The returns of the CNN+Transformer arbitrage strategies are statistically signiﬁcant and not
subsumed by conventional risk factors. Table II reports the out-of-sample pricing errors α of the
arbitrage strategies relative of the Fama-French 8 factor model and their mean returnsµ. We run a
time-series regression of the out-of-sample returns of the arbitrage strategies on the 8-factor model
(Fama-French 5 factors + momentum + short-term reversal + long-term reversal) and report the
annualizedα, accompanying t-statistic valuetα, and theR2 of the regression. In addition, we report
the annualized mean return µ along with its accompanying t-statistic tµ. The arbitrage strategies
26

## Page 28

Figure 5. Cumulative OOS Returns of Diﬀerent Arbitrage Strategies
(a) CNN+Trans, Fama-French 5
 (b) CNN+Trans, PCA 5
 (c) CNN+Trans, IPCA 5
(d) Fourier+FFN, Fama-French 5
 (e) Fourier+FFN, PCA 5
 (f) Fourier+FFN, IPCA 5
(g) OU+Thresh Fama-French 5
 (h) OU+Thresh PCA 5
 (i) OU+Thresh IPCA 5
These ﬁgures show the cumulative daily returns of the arbitrage strategies for our representative models on the out-of-sample
trading period between January 2002 and December 2016. We estimate the optimal arbitrage trading strategies for our three
benchmark models based on the out-of-sample residuals of the Fama-French, PCA and IPCA 5-factor models. The deep
learning models use the Sharpe ratio objective.
for the CNN+Transformer model forK≥ 1 are all statistically signiﬁcant and not explained by the
Fama-French 5 factors or price trend factors. Importantly, the pricing errors are essentially as large
as the mean returns, which implies that the returns of the CNN+Transformer arbitrage strategies
do not carry any risk premium of these eight factors. This is supported by the R2 values, which
are close to zero for the Fama-French or PCA residuals, and hence conﬁrm that these arbitrage
portfolios are essentially orthogonal to the Fama-French 8 factors. In contrast, one third of the
individual return variation for K = 0 is explained by those risk factors. However, even in that case
the pricing errors are signiﬁcant. The residuals of IPCA factors have a higher correlation with the
Fama-French 8 factors, suggesting that the conditional IPCA factor model extracts factors that are
inherently diﬀerent from the conventional risk factors. Note that the residuals of a Fama-French 8
factor model are not mechanically orthogonal in the time-series regression on the Fama-French 8
27

## Page 29

factors, as we construct out-of-sample residuals based on rolling window estimates. The parametric
arbitrage strategies are largely explained by conventional risk factors. The third subtable in Table
II shows that the residuals of the OU+Threshold model for Fama-French of PCA residuals do not
have statistically signiﬁcant pricing errors on a 1% level.
The CNN+Transformer has a consistent out-of-sample performance and is not aﬀected by vari-
ous negative events. Figure 5 shows the cumulative out-of-sample returns of the arbitrage strategies
for our representative models. We select the residuals of the various ﬁve-factor models as including
additional factors has only minor eﬀects on the performance. Note that the CNN+Transformer
model has consistently almost always positive returns, while maintaining a low volatility and avoid-
ing any large losses. Importantly, the performance of the CNN+Transformer is nearly completely
immune to both the “quant quake” which aﬀected quantitative trading groups and funds engaging
in statistical arbitrage in August 2007 (Barr (2007)), and the period of poor performance in quant
funds during 2011–2012 (Ebrahimi (2013)). The Fourier+FFN model also performs similarly well
until the ﬁnancial crisis, but its risk increases afterwards as displayed by the larger volatility and
larger drawdowns. The performance of the parametric model is visibly inferior. This illustrates that
although all strategies trade the same residuals, which should be orthogonal to common market
risk, proﬁtable arbitrage trading requires an appropriate signal and allocation policy.
E. Mean-Variance Objective
The deep learning statistical arbitrage strategies can achieve high average returns in spite of
leverage constraints. Our main deep learning models are estimated with a Sharpe ratio objective.
As the sum of absolute stock weights is normalized to one, the arbitrage strategies impose an
implicit leverage constraint. We show that the average return can be increased while maintaining
this leverage constraint. For this purpose we change the objective for the deep learning model to a
mean-variance objective. In order to illustrate the eﬀect of the diﬀerent objective function, we set
the risk aversion parameter to γ = 1.
Tables III and IV collect the results for the Sharpe ratio, mean, volatility and signiﬁcance tests.
As expected the Sharpe ratios are slightly lower compared to the corresponding model with Sharpe
ratio objective, but the mean returns are substantially increased. The CNN+Transformer model
achieves average annual returns around 20% with PCA and IPCA residuals while the volatility
is only around half as large as the one of a market portfolio. The mean returns are statistically
highly signiﬁcant and not spanned by conventional risk factors or a price trend risk premium.
The Fourier+FFN model can also obtain high average returns, but those come at the cost of
a higher volatility. Overall, we conﬁrm that the more ﬂexible signal extraction function of the
CNN+Transformer is crucial for the superior performance.
F. Unconditional Residual Means
The unconditional average of residuals is not a proﬁtable strategy and does not provide infor-
mation about the potential arbitrage proﬁtability contained in the residuals. A natural question to
28

## Page 30

Table III: OOS Annualized Performance Based on Mean-Variance Objective
CNN+Trans strategy, mean-variance objective function
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K SR µ σ SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 0.83 9.5% 11.4% 0.83 9.5% 11.4% 0.83 9.5% 11.4%
1 3.15 10.5% 3.3% 2.21 27.3% 12.3% 2.83 15.9% 5.6%
3 2.95 7.8% 2.6% 2.38 22.6% 9.5% 3.13 17.9% 5.7%
5 3.03 5.9% 2.0% 2.75 19.6% 7.1% 3.21 18.2% 5.7%
8 2.96 4.2% 1.4% 2.68 16.6% 6.2% 3.18 17.0% 5.4%
10 - - - 2.67 15.3% 5.7% 3.21 16.6% 5.2%
15 - - - 2.20 8.7% 4.0% 3.34 16.3% 4.9%
Fourier+FFN strategy, mean-variance objective function
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K SR µ σ SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 0.28 5.5% 19.3% 0.28 5.5% 19.3% 0.28 5.5% 19.3%
1 0.38 2.5% 6.7% 0.48 16.6% 34.8% 0.56 9.7% 17.2%
3 1.16 4.3% 3.7% 0.34 32.1% 93.1% 1.06 17.6% 16.7%
5 1.30 3.1% 2.4% 0.37 22.5% 61.2% 1.17 17.0% 14.5%
8 1.73 3.6% 2.0% 0.67 17.4% 25.9% 1.21 14.4% 11.9%
10 - - - 0.45 7.4% 16.4% 1.06 12.6% 11.9%
15 - - - 0.56 5.7% 10.2% 1.17 12.1% 10.4%
This table shows the out-of-sample annualized Sharpe ratio (SR), mean return (µ), and volatility (σ) of our CNN+Transformer
and Fourier+FFN models for diﬀerent numbers of risk factorsK, that we use to obtain the residuals. We use a mean-variance
objective function with risk aversion γ = 1. We use the daily out-of-sample residuals from January 1998 to December 2016
and evaluate the out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 2002 to December 2016. The two deep learning models are
calibrated on a rolling window of four years. The signals are extracted from a rolling window of L = 30 days. The K = 0
factor model corresponds to directly using stock returns instead of residuals for the signal and trading policy.
ask is if the residuals themselves have a risk premium component and if trading an equally weighted
portfolio of residuals could be proﬁtable. Table A.VI in the Appendix shows the performance of
this simple strategy. If we do not project out any factors (K = 0), this strategy essentially trades an
equally weighted market portfolio. Table A.VII in the Appendix reports the test statistics relative
to the Fama-French 8 factor model, which completely subsumes the market risk premium. Once
we regress out at least 3 factors, the equally weighted residuals have a mean return of around 1%
or lower. The low volatility conﬁrms that the residuals are only weakly cross-sectionally dependent
and are largely diversiﬁed away. The moderately large Sharpe ratios for PCA residuals is a conse-
quence of the near zero volatility. Scaling up the mean returns to a meaningful magnitude would
potentially require an unreasonable amount of leverage. Overall, we conﬁrm that residuals need to
be combined with a signal and trading policy that takes advantage of the time series patterns in
order to achieve a proﬁtable strategy.
IPCA factors are close to uncorrelated with conventional risk factors. The R2 values in Table
A.VII are as expected for the Fama-French factors and, not surprisingly, after regressing out all of
those factors, the cross-sectional average of the residuals is essentially orthogonal to those factors.
The PCA residuals show a very similar behavior. However, the conditional IPCA model leaves a
29

## Page 31

Table IV: Signiﬁcance of Arbitrage Alphas based on Mean-Variance Objective
CNN+Trans model
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ
0 5.8% 2.2 ∗ 19.6% 9.5% 3.2 ∗∗ 5.8% 2.2 ∗ 19.6% 9.5% 3.2 ∗∗ 5.8% 2.2 ∗ 19.6% 9.5% 3.2 ∗∗
1 9.9% 12∗∗∗ 7.1% 10.5% 12 ∗∗∗ 26.3% 8.3∗∗∗ 1.6% 27.3% 8.6 ∗∗∗ 14.0% 11∗∗∗ 23.5% 15.9% 11 ∗∗∗
3 7.5% 11∗∗∗ 5.3% 7.8% 11 ∗∗∗ 22.1% 9.1∗∗∗ 2.2% 22.6% 9.2 ∗∗∗ 16.6% 12∗∗∗ 17.6% 17.9% 12 ∗∗∗
5 5.7% 11∗∗∗ 5.3% 5.9% 12 ∗∗∗ 19.0% 10∗∗∗ 3.2% 19.6% 11 ∗∗∗ 16.7% 12∗∗∗ 16.0% 18.2% 12 ∗∗∗
8 4.4% 9.8∗∗∗ 3.6% 4.6% 10 ∗∗∗ 16.3% 10∗∗∗ 1.6% 16.6% 10 ∗∗∗ 15.5% 12∗∗∗ 18.3% 17.0% 12 ∗∗∗
10 - - - - - 14.8% 10∗∗∗ 1.7% 15.3% 10 ∗∗∗ 15.2% 13∗∗∗ 20.6% 16.6% 12 ∗∗∗
15 - - - - - 8.5% 8.4∗∗∗ 0.9% 8.7% 8.5 ∗∗∗ 14.8% 13∗∗∗ 21.6% 16.3% 13 ∗∗∗
Fourier+FFN model
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ
0 3.2% 0.7 8.4% 5.5% 1.1 3.2% 0.7 8.4% 5.5% 1.1 3.2% 0.7 8.4% 5.5% 1.1
1 2.8% 1.6 1.8% 2.5% 1.5 15.4% 1.7 1.3% 16.6% 1.9 7.9% 1.8 2.6% 9.7% 2.2 ∗
3 4.1% 4.4∗∗∗ 3.4% 4.3% 4.5 ∗∗∗ 30.3% 1.3 0.1% 32.1% 1.3 17.4% 4.1∗∗∗ 1.9% 17.6% 4.1 ∗∗∗
5 2.9% 4.8∗∗∗ 3.1% 3.1% 5.0 ∗∗∗ 21.0% 1.3 0.1% 22.5% 1.4 15.9% 4.3∗∗∗ 2.6% 17.0% 4.5 ∗∗∗
8 3.5% 6.8∗∗∗ 2.3% 3.6% 7.0 ∗∗∗ 17.4% 2.6∗∗ 0.3% 17.2% 2.6 ∗∗ 12.9% 4.3∗∗∗ 4.4% 14.4% 4.7 ∗∗∗
10 - - - - - 7.1% 1.7 0.3% 7.4% 1.8 11.7% 3.9∗∗∗ 3.5% 12.6% 4.1 ∗∗∗
15 - - - - - 5.5% 2.1 ∗ 0.1% 5.7% 2.2 ∗ 11.3% 4.3∗∗∗ 4.0% 12.1% 4.5 ∗∗∗
This table shows the out-of-sample pricing errors α of the arbitrage strategies relative of the Fama-French 8 factor model and
their mean returns µ for the diﬀerent arbitrage models and diﬀerent number of factors K that we use to obtain the residuals.
We use a mean-variance objective function with risk aversion γ = 1. We run a time-series regression of the out-of-sample
returns of the arbitrage strategies on the 8-factor model (Fama-French 5 factors + momentum + short-term reversal + long-
term reversal) and report the annualized α, accompanying t-statistic value tα, and the R2 of the regression. In addition, we
report the annualized mean return µ along with its accompanying t-statistic tµ. The hypothesis test are two-sided and stars
indicate p-values of 5% (∗), 1% (∗∗), and 0.1% (∗∗∗). All results use the out-of-sample daily returns from January 2002 to
December 2016.
component in the residuals that it is highly correlated with conventional risk factors. In this sense,
the IPCA factors extract a factor model that is quite diﬀerent from the Fama-French factors.
Importantly, unconditional means and alphas of asset pricing residuals are a poor measure of
arbitrage opportunities. The mean and alphas of residuals that are optimally traded based on their
time series patterns have mean returns that can be larger by a factor of 50. This implies more
generally, that the unconditional perspective of evaluating asset pricing models could potentially
overstate the eﬃciency of markets and the pricing ability of asset pricing models.
G. Importance of Time-Series Signal
How important is the ﬂexibility in the signal extraction function relative to the allocation
function? So far, we have considered a rigid parametric model for the signal and allocation function
and a ﬂexible allocation function but either a pre-speciﬁed time-series ﬁlter or a data-driven ﬂexible
ﬁlter. In A.IX in Appendix we also report the results for two additional model variations, which
serve as ablation tests emphasizing the central importance of applying a time-series model to extract
a signal extraction function from the data.
The ﬁrst model, OU+FFN, uses the same 4-dimensional OU signal as the OU+Threshold
policy, but replaces the threshold allocation function with an FFN allocation function. This FFN
30

## Page 32

allocation function has the same architecture as that of the Fourier+FFN policy, except the input
is 4-dimensional instead of 30-dimensional. The results show that even despite using a very ﬂexible
allocation function, the results are similar or even worse than the simple parametric thresholding
rule. This points to the weakness of the OU signal representation: although the allocation function
is a powerful universal approximator, it cannot accomplish much with an information-poor input. If
the optimal allocation function given the simple OU signal is well approximated by the parametric
thresholding rule, then the nonparametric FFN oﬀers too much ﬂexibility without comparable
eﬃciency, which leads to a noisier estimate of a simple function and hence worse out-of-sample
performance.
The second model does not extract a time-series signal from the residuals, but uses the residuals
themselves as signal to a ﬂexible FFN allocation function. As the allocation function uses the same
type of network as for the CNN+Transformer, Fourier+FFN or OU+FFN, this setup directly
assesses the relevance of using a time-series model for the signal. The FFN model also performs
worse than the deep learning models that apply a time-series ﬁlter to the residuals. This is a good
example to emphasize the importance of a time-series model. While FFNs are ﬂexible in learning
low dimensional functional relationships, they are limited in learning a complex dependency model
if the training data is limited. For example, the FFN is not suﬃciently eﬃcient to learn an FFT-
like transformation and hence has a substantially worse performance on the original time-series
compared to frequency-transformed time-series.
In summary, the ﬂexible data-driven signal extraction function of the CNN+Transformer model
seems to be the critical element for statistical arbitrage. A ﬂexible allocation function is not
suﬃcient to compensate for an uninformative signal.
H. Dependency between Arbitrage Strategies
The trading strategies for diﬀerent factor models are only weakly correlated. In Table A.VIII,
we report the correlations of the returns of our CNN+Transformer strategies across factor models
with 3, 5, and 10 factors, based on the Sharpe ratio objective function strategy. 14 Notably, the
correlations between strategies from diﬀerent factor model families range from roughly 0.2 to 0.45,
indicating that strategies for diﬀerent factor model families can be used as part of a diversiﬁcation
strategy. While the performance of the arbitrage trading for the residuals obtained with diﬀerent
families of factor models is comparable, the factors themselves are diﬀerent. Hence, even if the
arbitrage signal and allocation functions are similar, the resulting strategies can be weakly corre-
lated. The within-family correlations range from 0.4 to 0.85, indicating that the residuals from the
same class of factor model capture similar patterns.
14The correlations for the mean-variance objective function are similar.
31

## Page 33

Table V: OOS Annualized Performance of CNN+Trans for 60 Days Lookback Window
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K SR µ σ SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 1.50 13.5% 9.0% 1.50 13.5% 9.0% 1.50 13.5% 9.0%
1 2.95 9.6% 3.2% 2.68 15.8% 5.9% 3.14 8.8% 2.8%
3 3.21 8.7% 2.7% 3.49 16.8% 4.8% 3.84 9.6% 2.5%
5 3.23 6.8% 2.1% 3.54 16.0% 4.5% 3.90 9.2% 2.4%
8 2.96 4.2% 1.4% 3.02 12.5% 4.2% 3.93 8.7% 2.2%
10 - - - 2.67 9.9% 3.7% 3.98 9.2% 2.3%
15 - - - 2.36 8.1% 3.4% 4.24 9.6% 2.3%
This table shows the out-of-sample annualized Sharpe ratio (SR), mean return (µ), and volatility (σ) of the CNN+Transformer
model for diﬀerent numbers of risk factors K, that we use to obtain the residuals. The signals are extracted from a rolling
window of L = 60 days. We use the daily out-of-sample residuals from January 1998 to December 2016 and evaluate the
out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 2002 to December 2016. The model is calibrated on a rolling window of four
years and uses the Sharpe ratio objective function. The K = 0 factor model corresponds to directly using stock returns instead
of residuals for the signal and trading policy.
I. Stability over Time
Our results are robust to length of the local window to extract the trading signal. We re-
estimate the CNN+Transformer model on an extended rolling lookback window of L = 60 days,
while keeping the rest of the model structure the same. Tables V and VI show that the results are
robust to the choice of lookback window. Extending the local window to 60 trading days, which
is close to three months, leads to essentially the same performance as using only the most recent
L = 30 trading days to infer the signal. This is further evidence that the arbitrage signal is diﬀerent
from conventional momentum or reversal strategies that incorporate information from longer time
periods. As the signal can be inferred from the most recent past, it implies that either the arbitrage
signal depends only on the most recent days or that those days are suﬃcient to infer the relevant
time-series structure. In the next section, we provide evidence that the arbitrage trading signals
put strong emphasis on most recent two weeks prior to the trading.
A constant-in-time signal and allocation function captures a large fraction of the arbitrage infor-
mation. We re-estimate the CNN+Transformer model with a constant model instead of the rolling
window calibration. Our main models are estimated on a rolling window of four years, which allows
the models to adopt to changing economic conditions. Here we use either the ﬁrst Ttrain = 4 years
(1,000 trading days) or Ttrain = 8 years (2,000 trading days) to estimate the signal and allocation
function, and then keep those functions constant for the remaining out-of-sample trading period.
The results are reported in Tables VII and VIII. As expected the performance decreases relative to
a time-varying model with re-estimation, which suggests that there is some degree of time-variation
in the signal and allocation function. The longer training window of 8 years results in slightly higher
Sharpe ratios than the 4 year window, as the model has more data and more variety in the market
environment to learn the arbitrage information. Importantly, the constant CNN+Transformer still
substantially outperforms the other benchmark models, Fourier+FFN and OU+Threshold, even
if those are estimated on a rolling window. We conclude that the constant signal and allocation
32

## Page 34

Table VI: Signiﬁcance of Arbitrage Alphas for 60 Days Lookback Window
CNN+Trans Model , Sharpe objective function,L = 60 days lookback window
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ
0 11.8% 5.6∗∗∗ 19.5% 13.5% 5.8∗∗∗ 11.8% 5.6∗∗∗ 19.5% 13.5% 5.8∗∗∗ 11.8% 5.6∗∗∗ 19.5% 13.5% 5.8∗∗∗
1 9.1% 11 ∗∗∗ 7.2% 9.6% 11 ∗∗∗ 15.5% 10∗∗∗ 1.2% 15.8% 10 ∗∗∗ 8.2% 12 ∗∗∗ 10.1% 8.8% 12 ∗∗∗
3 8.3% 12 ∗∗∗ 7.1% 8.7% 12 ∗∗∗ 16.5% 13∗∗∗ 2.5% 16.8% 14 ∗∗∗ 9.2% 15 ∗∗∗ 9.3% 9.6% 15 ∗∗∗
5 6.5% 12 ∗∗∗ 6.0% 6.8% 13 ∗∗∗ 15.6% 13∗∗∗ 2.2% 16.0% 14 ∗∗∗ 8.8% 15 ∗∗∗ 10.3% 9.2% 15 ∗∗∗
8 4.1% 11 ∗∗∗ 3.2% 4.2% 11 ∗∗∗ 12.2% 11∗∗∗ 1.6% 12.5% 12 ∗∗∗ 8.3% 15 ∗∗∗ 8.9% 8.7% 15 ∗∗∗
10 - - - - - 9.7% 10 ∗∗∗ 1.0% 9.9% 10 ∗∗∗ 8.8% 15 ∗∗∗ 8.3% 9.2% 15 ∗∗∗
15 - - - - - 8.1% 9.1∗∗∗ 0.7% 8.1% 9.1 ∗∗∗ 9.2% 16 ∗∗∗ 9.3% 9.6% 16 ∗∗∗
This table shows the out-of-sample pricing errors α of the arbitrage strategies relative of the Fama-French 8 factor model and
their mean returns µ for the CNN+Transformer model and diﬀerent number of factors K that we use to obtain the residuals.
The signals are extracted from a rolling window of L = 60 days. We run a time-series regression of the out-of-sample returns
of the arbitrage strategies on the 8-factor model (Fama-French 5 factors + momentum + short-term reversal + long-term
reversal) and report the annualized α, accompanying t-statistic value tα, and the R2 of the regression. In addition, we report
the annualized mean return µ along with its accompanying t-statistic tµ. The hypothesis test are two-sided and stars indicate
p-values of 5% (∗), 1% (∗∗), and 0.1% (∗∗∗). All results use the out-of-sample daily returns from January 2002 to December
2016 and are based on a Sharpe ratio objective.
Table VII: OOS Annualized Performance of CNN+Trans for Constant Model
Ttrain = 4 years
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K SR µ σ SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 1.10 8.5% 7.8% 1.10 8.5% 7.8% 1.10 8.5% 7.8%
1 1.90 4.5% 2.3% 0.66 5.2% 7.9% 0.94 3.1% 3.3%
3 1.60 3.6% 2.2% 1.65 8.7% 5.3% 1.82 5.3% 2.9%
5 1.81 3.0% 1.7% 1.93 9.8% 5.1% 2.09 5.4% 2.6%
8 1.70 2.5% 1.5% 2.04 9.6% 4.7% 1.89 5.0% 2.6%
10 - - - 2.06 9.1% 4.4% 1.77 4.7% 2.7%
15 - - - 1.82 7.0% 3.9% 2.09 5.5% 2.7%
Ttrain = 8 years
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K SR µ σ SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 1.33 12.0% 9.0% 1.33 12.0% 9.0% 1.33 12.0% 9.0%
1 2.06 5.0% 2.4% 1.81 15.2% 8.4% 2.02 8.5% 4.2%
3 2.46 5.3% 2.2% 2.04 13.1% 6.4% 2.47 7.5% 3.0%
5 1.82 3.2% 1.8% 1.91 11.9% 6.2% 2.64 7.6% 2.9%
8 1.48 2.5% 1.7% 1.89 10.8% 5.7% 2.71 8.3% 3.1%
10 - - - 1.82 10.0% 5.5% 2.68 8.2% 3.1%
15 - - - 1.38 6.2% 4.5% 2.70 7.8% 2.9%
This table shows the out-of-sample annualized Sharpe ratio (SR), mean return (µ), and volatility (σ) of the CNN+Transformer
model for diﬀerent numbers of risk factorsK. We estimate the model on only once on the ﬁrst Ttrain days and keep it constant
on the remaining test set. We use the daily out-of-sample residuals from January 1998 to December 2016 and evaluate the
out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 1998 +Ttrain to December 2016. The signals are extracted from a rolling window
of L = 30 days and we use the Sharpe ratio objective function.
function for the CNN+Transformer model already capture a substantial amount of arbitrage infor-
mation. Therefore, the constant functions serve as a meaningful model to analyze in more detail
33

## Page 35

Table VIII: Signiﬁcance of Arbitrage Alphas for Constant Model
CNN+Trans model, Sharpe objective function,Ttrain= 4 years
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ
0 8.4% 4.2∗∗∗ 3.0% 8.5% 4.3 ∗∗∗ 8.4% 4.2∗∗∗ 3.0% 8.5% 4.3 ∗∗∗ 8.4% 4.2∗∗∗ 3.0% 8.5% 4.3 ∗∗∗
1 4.0% 6.8∗∗∗ 5.9% 4.5% 7.3 ∗∗∗ 4.1% 2.0 ∗ 4.5% 5.2% 2.5 ∗ 3.1% 3.7∗∗∗ 1.6% 3.1% 3.6 ∗∗∗
3 3.2% 5.7∗∗∗ 4.9% 3.6% 6.2 ∗∗∗ 8.2% 6.1∗∗∗ 2.7% 8.7% 6.4 ∗∗∗ 5.3% 7.4∗∗∗ 11.7% 5.3% 7.0 ∗∗∗
5 2.8% 6.6∗∗∗ 4.3% 3.0% 7.0 ∗∗∗ 9.3% 7.1∗∗∗ 1.8% 9.8% 7.5 ∗∗∗ 5.5% 8.6∗∗∗ 8.3% 5.4% 8.1 ∗∗∗
8 2.3% 6.1∗∗∗ 5.1% 2.5% 6.6 ∗∗∗ 9.0% 7.5∗∗∗ 2.2% 9.6% 7.9 ∗∗∗ 5.0% 7.7∗∗∗ 8.2% 5.0% 7.3 ∗∗∗
10 - - - - - 8.6% 7.5∗∗∗ 1.9% 9.1% 8.0 ∗∗∗ 5.1% 8.0∗∗∗ 16.6% 4.7% 6.9 ∗∗∗
15 - - - - - 6.8% 6.8∗∗∗ 1.0% 7.0% 7.1 ∗∗∗ 5.8% 9.3∗∗∗ 17.6% 5.5% 8.1 ∗∗∗
CNN+Trans model, Sharpe objective function,Ttrain= 8 years
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ
0 10.1% 4.1∗∗∗ 18.1% 12.0% 4.4∗∗∗ 10.1% 4.1∗∗∗ 18.1% 12.0% 4.4∗∗∗ 10.1% 4.1∗∗∗ 18.1% 12.0% 4.4∗∗∗
1 4.4% 6.5∗∗∗ 14.3% 5.0% 6.8 ∗∗∗ 14.5% 5.8∗∗∗ 2.5% 15.2% 6.0 ∗∗∗ 7.0% 6.6∗∗∗ 30.6% 8.5% 6.7 ∗∗∗
3 4.9% 7.9∗∗∗ 11.6% 5.3% 8.2 ∗∗∗ 12.8% 6.7∗∗∗ 2.7% 13.1% 6.8 ∗∗∗ 7.0% 7.9∗∗∗ 8.2% 7.5% 8.2 ∗∗∗
5 2.9% 5.8∗∗∗ 12.3% 3.2% 6.0 ∗∗∗ 11.6% 6.2∗∗∗ 1.6% 11.9% 6.3 ∗∗∗ 7.1% 8.7∗∗∗ 12.1% 7.6% 8.7 ∗∗∗
8 2.3% 4.7∗∗∗ 5.4% 2.5% 4.9 ∗∗∗ 10.2% 6.0∗∗∗ 3.1% 10.8% 6.3 ∗∗∗ 7.7% 9.0∗∗∗ 14.6% 8.3% 9.0 ∗∗∗
10 - - - - - 9.4% 5.7∗∗∗ 2.6% 10.0% 6.0 ∗∗∗ 7.7% 8.9∗∗∗ 11.3% 8.2% 8.9 ∗∗∗
15 - - - - - 6.0% 4.4∗∗∗ 0.9% 6.2% 4.6 ∗∗∗ 7.4% 8.9∗∗∗ 11.2% 7.8% 8.9 ∗∗∗
This table shows the out-of-sample pricing errors α of the arbitrage strategies relative of the Fama-French 8 factor model and
their mean returns µ for the CNN+Transformer model and diﬀerent number of factors K. We estimate the model on only
once on the ﬁrst Ttrain days and keep it constant on the remaining test set. We use the daily out-of-sample residuals from
January 1998 to December 2016 and evaluate the out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 1998 + Ttrain to December
2016. The signals are extracted from a rolling window of L = 30 days and we use the Sharpe ratio objective function. We run
a time-series regression of the out-of-sample returns of the arbitrage strategies on the 8-factor model (Fama-French 5 factors
+ momentum + short-term reversal + long-term reversal) and report the annualized α, accompanying t-statistic value tα,
and the R2 of the regression. In addition, we report the annualized mean return µ along with its accompanying t-statistic tµ.
The hypothesis test are two-sided and stars indicate p-values of 5% ( ∗), 1% (∗∗), and 0.1% (∗∗∗).
in Section III.N.
J. Market Frictions and Transaction Costs
Our deep learning arbitrage strategies remain proﬁtable in the presence of realistic trading
frictions. In practice, trading costs associated with high turnover or large short-selling positions
can diminish the proﬁtability of arbitrage trading. In order to ensure that our model produces
economically meaningful results, we extend it to the setting in which both transaction costs and
holding costs are accounted for. We do not model market frictions associated with market impact,
as in our empirical analysis we restrict the asset universe to stocks with large market capitalization,
which are especially liquid.
In our market-friction extension, the daily returns Rt of the strategy now have constant linear
penalties associated with the daily turnover and the proportion of short trades. These penalties
quantify proportional transaction costs, which are used to model trading fees, size of the bid-ask
spread, etc., and holding costs, which are used to model short borrow rate fees charged by a
brokerage. In particular, we incorporate a subset of the market friction models proposed by Boyd
34

## Page 36

Table IX: OOS Performance of CNN+Trans with Trading Frictions
IPCA factor model
Sharpe ratio Mean-variance
K SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 0.52 8.5% 16.3% 0.22 2.6% 11.9%
1 0.85 5.9% 6.9% 0.86 5.5% 6.4%
3 1.24 6.6% 5.4% 1.16 6.9% 5.9%
5 1.11 5.5% 5.0% 1.02 5.3% 5.3%
10 0.98 5.1% 5.2% 1.04 5.4% 5.2%
15 0.94 4.8% 5.1% 1.02 5.1% 5.0%
This table shows the out-of-sample annualized Sharpe ratio (SR), mean return (µ), and volatility (σ) for the CNN+Transformer
model with trading frictions on IPCA residuals. We use the daily out-of-sample residuals from January 1998 to December
2016 and evaluate the out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 2002 to December 2016. The models are calibrated
on a rolling window of four years and use either the Sharpe ratio or mean-variance objective function with trading costs
(cost(wR
t−1,wR
t−2) = 0.0005∥wR
t−1−wR
t−2∥L1 + 0.0001∥ min(wR
t−1, 0)∥L1). The signals are extracted from a rolling window of
L = 30 days.
et al. (2017), which are commonly used in the statistical arbitrage literature. 15 Mathematically, we
subtract the market-friction costs
cost(wR
t−1,wR
t−2) = 0.0005∥wR
t−1−wR
t−2∥L1 + 0.0001∥ min(wR
t−1, 0)∥L1
from the portfolio returns and use these net portfolio returns in the optimization problem of section
II.C, where wR
t−1∈ RNt−1 is the strategy’s allocation weight vector at time t− 1. The ﬁrst penalty
term represents a slippage/transaction cost of 5 basis points per transaction, whereas the second
one is a holding cost of 1 basis point per short position. Both costs are universal for all times and all
stocks. This corresponds to a modiﬁcation of the objective function in the training and evaluation
parts of our algorithm. We use this model for the sake of illustration and simplicity given that in
our empirical study we trade a universe of highly liquid US stocks, but more complicated models 16
may be included in the computations without any signiﬁcant structural changes.
Table IX displays the Sharpe ratios, average returns, and volatility of our CNN+Transformer
model under market frictions for IPCA residuals. The results for PCA residuals are collected in the
Appendix in Table A.X with very similar ﬁndings. We exclude the Fama-French factor model from
the analysis with market frictions, as we take the traded factors from Kenneth French Data Library
as given, which are based on a larger stock universe with diﬀerent trading costs and, hence, would
not be directly comparable to the IPCA and PCA results.17 As expected the Sharpe ratios are lower
and range from 0.94 to 1.24 for a reasonable number of IPCA factors. The Sharpe ratio and mean-
15See for example Avellaneda and Lee (2010), Yeo and Papanicolaou (2017) and Krauss et al. (2017).
16For example, those considering time and stock-dependent transaction costs or market impact of the trades on
the stock prices.
17Regardless, each factor corresponds to a portfolio of traded assets, and thus the residuals of this model could
be traded in a number of a number of ways under suitable extensions. For example, we could include ETFs which
try to track a value or size premium, project these latent factors onto our asset universe, or approximate each factor
with a number of sparse subset of assets in our asset universe as in Pelger and Xiong (2021). However, these changes
constitute diﬀerences that would make the results incomparable to the PCA and IPCA results.
35

## Page 37

Figure 6: Turnover of CNN+Transformer Model with and without Trading Friction Objective
(a) No Trading Friction Penalty
 (b) With Trading Friction Penalty
These ﬁgures show the daily turnover of CNN+Transformer model with and without trading friction objective on the repre-
sentative IPCA 5-factor residuals for the out-of-sample trading period between January 2002 and December 2016. The models
are calibrated on a rolling window of four years and use the Sharpe ratio objective function with or without trading costs
(cost(wR
t−1,wR
t−2) = 0.0005∥wR
t−1−wR
t−2∥L1 + 0.0001∥ min(wR
t−1, 0)∥L1). We deﬁne turnover as the ℓ1 norm of the diﬀerence
between allocation weight vectors at consecutive times, i.e. ||wR
t−1−wR
t−2||L1.
Figure 7: Proportion of Short Allocation Weights of CNN+Transformer Model with and
without Trading Friction Objective
(a) No Trading Friction Penalty
 (b) With Trading Friction Penalty
These ﬁgures show the daily fraction of short trades of the CNN+Transformer strategies with and without trading friction
objective on the representative IPCA 5-factor residuals for the out-of-sample trading period between January 2002 and
December 2016. Each plot shows the absolute value of the sum of negative weights ∥ min(wR
t−1, 0)∥L1 relative to the sum of
absolute values of all weights, which is normalized to ∥wR
t−1∥1 = 1. The models are calibrated on a rolling window of four
years and use the Sharpe ratio objective function with or without trading costs (cost(wR
t−1,wR
t−2) = 0.0005∥wR
t−1−wR
t−2∥L1 +
0.0001∥ min(wR
t−1, 0)∥L1).
variance objective have the desired eﬀects, but lead to overall very similar results. Importantly, the
arbitrage strategies retain their economic signiﬁcance even in the presence of trading costs.
These results present a lower bound on the proﬁtability under trading frictions, as we have
made four simplifying assumptions. First, in the current implementation the factor composition
cannot be changed due to trading costs. A possible extension could construct the latent risk
factors by including the trading friction objective. For example, the sparse representation of latent
factors as in Pelger and Xiong (2020) would reduce trading costs. Second, because the policy with
frictions is recursive, we are conducting an approximate training process to maintain parallelization
36

## Page 38

given our computational resources and the large volume of data, but this may lead to suboptimal
optimization results. However, it would be possible to conduct an exact sequential training process
at the cost of more computation. Third, our modiﬁed architecture with the market-friction objective
is given by the simplest modiﬁcation to our architecture without frictions, but it is possible that
the optimal transaction and holding cost-minimizing strategy has a more complicated functional
form or is not Markovian and requires additional previous allocations. Last but not least, we keep
the hyperparameters of our main analysis, but we could potentially improve the performance by
employing hyperparameter tuning.
The eﬀect of trading frictions is time-varying and our model can exploit particularly proﬁtable
arbitrage time periods by increasing trading and short positions. In Figure 6 we analyze the daily
turnover of a representative CNN+Transformer strategy based on IPCA 5-factor residuals and
a Sharpe ratio objective. Broadly, we see that our model with trading friction penalty is able
to adapt by decreasing daily turnover. However, our model seems to reduce turnover based on
trading opportunities. During the times of high market volatility such as 2007–2009, arbitrage
trading could be potentially be more proﬁtable, which our model takes advantage of. On the
other hand, during the later years of the calm bull market from 2011–2015, strategies with less
turnover could maintain proﬁtability. This pattern is conﬁrmed in Figure 7 which shows the daily
proportion of allocation weights, which are short stocks in our universe. As expected the holding
cost friction model reduces the overall proportion of short trades. Interestingly, our model is able
to intelligently choose time periods during which it can maximize performance by taking positions
with higher short proportion, such as the market turmoil at the end of 2015 and the ﬁnancial crisis
of 2008. Eﬀectively, this indicates that the CNN+Transformer trading policy has learned to avoid
holding and transaction costs by generally modifying the original strategy’s allocations to be less
short-biased on average, and to more appropriately enter short-dominant positions during relevant
subperiods.
K. Portfolio Weight Concentration
In this section we study the portfolio weight concentration of successful statistical arbitrage
trading. We show that our arbitrage portfolios are well-diversiﬁed, but we can still achieve a large
fraction of the proﬁtability when restricted to a sparse set of assets. In this and the following
sections, the benchmark model is the CNN+Transformer based on IPCA 5-factor residuals and
a Sharpe ratio objective. The results hold qualitatively for alternative factor speciﬁcations. We
study the out-of-sample portfolio weights wR
t for individual stocks.
Figure 8 shows that the optimal portfolio weights are well-diversiﬁed and do not rely on exces-
sively large weights on individual stocks. The left subplot the shows the histogram of the distribu-
tion of stock weightswR
t aggregated over time. The weights are approximately normally distributed
and centered at zero. Hence, most weights concentrate around values in [ −0.5%, +0.5%], which
implies a relatively well-diversiﬁed portfolio. Second, the portfolios correspond to long-short posi-
tions with approximately similar weights on each of the two legs. The right subplot estimates the
37

## Page 39

Figure 8: Distribution of Portfolio Weights
(a) Distribution of stock portfolio weights
 (b) Distribution of stock portfolio weights with
trading friction penalty
These ﬁgures show histograms of the distribution of stock weights wR
t aggregated over time. Subplot (a) shows the out-of-
sample weights for our empirical benchmark model, which is the CNN+Transformer model based on IPCA 5-factor residuals.
Subplot (b) estimates the baseline model with trading friction penalty. The out-of-sample trading period is between January
2002 and December 2016.
baseline model with the trading friction penalty from Section III.J. While a trading friction penalty
increases the kurtosis, which implies sparser weights, we still do not observe excessive weights on
individual stocks. The trading friction penalty also reduces short sales, which is consistent with
Figure 7.
Our statistical arbitrage trading policy does not target speciﬁc industries. Figure A.5 in the
Appendix shows the rolling industry concentration of portfolio weights standardized by the popu-
lation industry concentration. The fraction invested in a speciﬁc industry follows very closely the
sample proportion of stocks in the corresponding industry. While there is some minor variation in
the industry concentration over time, it deviates less than 20% from the population concentration.
This suggests that stocks in all industries oﬀer statistical arbitrage opportunities.
While our statistical arbitrage portfolios are well-diversiﬁed, a subset of a few stocks can already
achieve most of their performance. This ﬁnding is important for optimization under trading fric-
tions. We construct sparse trading policies by selecting only the proportion p of the stock weights
wR
t with the largest absolute value for trading. We compare the full model with sparse models,
which invest only in p = 1%, 5%, 10% or 20% of the stocks. Note that this represents only a lower
bound for the performance of sparse portfolios, as we are not including the sparsity constraint in
the optimization.
Figure 9 in panel A shows the annualized out-of-sample Sharpe ratio, mean return and volatility
of arbitrage strategies based only the most extreme portfolio weights. Portfolios with less stocks
are less diversiﬁed and as expected have a higher volatility. However, focussing on the extreme
weights can increase the mean return of the portfolios. The Sharpe ratio of sparse portfolios is
generally decreasing in the degree of sparsity, as the loss in diversiﬁcation dominates the eﬀect
of higher expected returns. However, a sparse portfolio can capture a substantial amount of the
proﬁtability. We achieve out-of-sample Sharpe ratios above two with only 10% of the stocks. These
38

## Page 40

Figure 9: Performance of Sparse Portfolios
PANEL A: Largest Stock Portfolio Weights
(a) Sharpe ratio
 (b) Mean Return
 (c) Volatility
PANEL B: Largest Residual Portfolio Weights
(d) Sharpe ratio
 (e) Mean Return
 (f) Volatility
These ﬁgures show the annualized out-of-sample Sharpe ratio, mean return and volatility of arbitrage strategies based on
selecting only the largest portfolio weights in absolute value. Panel A selects the proportion p of the most extreme stock
weightswR
t for trading, while panel B selects the proportion p of the most extreme residual weights wϵ
t for the trading policy.
The baseline model is the CNN+Transformer model based on IPCA 5-factor residuals for the out-of-sample trading period
between January 2002 and December 2016. We consider the full model p = 1 and the fraction p = 0.01, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2.
Figure 10: Cumulative Returns of Sparse Portfolios
(a) Cumulative Returns of Extreme Stock
Portfolio Weights
(b) Cumulative Returns of Extreme Residual
Portfolio Weights
These ﬁgures show the cumulative returns of sparse portfolio weights in the stock and residual weight vectors. Subplot (a)
selects the proportion p of the stock weights wR
t with the largest absolute value for trading, while subplot (b) selects the
proportion p of the residual weights wϵ
t with the largest absolute value for the trading policy. The baseline model is the
CNN+Transformer model based on IPCA 5-factor residuals for the out-of-sample trading period between January 2002 and
December 2016. We consider the full model p = 1 and the fraction p = 0.01, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2.
are lower bounds as we use the model that is optimized for non-sparse weights, and select only the
extreme weights. It is noteworthy, that using only 5% of the stocks, which corresponds to roughly
39

## Page 41

25 stocks in our sample, achieves mean returns of 14%. However, the performance deteriorates
when our portfolio consists of only 1%, corresponding to around 5 stocks. The cumulative return
time series in Figure 10 further illustrate the diﬀerent eﬀect of sparsity on the mean and variance
of the strategies.
In our second analysis, we construct sparse residual portfolio weights wϵ
t. Similar to the sparse
stock weights, we select the proportion p of the most extreme residual weights wϵ
t for the trading
policy. A sparse stock portfolio weight wR
t combines a sparse factor representation and a sparse
trading policy in residuals. By studying the largest portfolio weights in residuals, we can separate
the eﬀect of sparse factors from a sparse trading policy in residuals. This is relevant as some factors
could be approximated by a sparse set of traded assets, for example ETFs. Panel B in Figure 9 shows
the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio, mean return and volatility for sparse residual portfolio weights wϵ
t.
The Sharpe ratio eﬀects are very similar, as targeting the most extreme residual portfolios results
in larger mean returns, while it increases the variance. However, a sparse residual portfolio can
achieve around twice the expected return of a sparse stock portfolio.
L. Complexity of Arbitrage Trading
Our CNN+Transformer solution can discover complex trading signals and policies. As a ro-
bustness check, we study how much simple reversal strategies can earn. Given the residuals from
our baseline IPCA-5-factor model, we construct long-short trading strategies for diﬀerent time
lags. Such high-minus-low strategies have been motivated in He et al. (2022). In more detail, the
portfolio weights of the simple trading strategy are long-short portfolios, that buy the 20% lowest
residuals and sell the 20% highest residuals from L periods in the past.
Figure 11 shows the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio, mean return and volatility of simple reversal
strategies. First, these simple reversal strategies yield positive returns and Sharpe ratios. The
variance is increasing for longer lags. The reversal returns increase substantially with a lag of at
least one week (ﬁve trading days). The Sharpe ratios are primarily driven by the low variance and
achieve Sharpe ratios of up to 0.3 for lags between one and two weeks.
Figure 11: Simple Reversal Trading
(a) Sharpe ratio
 (b) Mean Return
 (c) Volatility
These ﬁgures show the annualized out-of-sample Sharpe ratio, mean return and volatility of simple reversal strategies based
on IPCA 5-factor residuals. The portfolio weights of the simple trading strategy are long-short portfolios, that buy the 20%
lowest residuals and sell the 20% highest residuals for L periods in the past. The out-of-sample trading period is between
January 2002 and December 2016.
40

## Page 42

Simple reversal strategies result in substantially lower mean returns and Sharpe ratios than our
complex arbitrage strategies. This conﬁrms that simple ad-hoc approaches are not suﬃcient to
leverage mispricing and successful arbitrage trading is more complex than simple reversal patterns.
The ﬁndings also suggest that there is proﬁtability in longer holding periods for signals that are
further in the past. We will study this aspect in depth in the next section.
M. Persistence of Arbitrage
We study arbitrage trading for diﬀerent holding periods and show that statistical arbitrage
signals are persistent. Given the out-of-sample portfolio weights wR
t , we document the portfolio
performance for longer holding periods. As in the previous sections, our benchmark model is the
CNN+Transformer based on IPCA 5-factor residuals and a Sharpe ratio objective.
First, we consider longer holding periods, that can overlap. An investment with weights wR
t
is held for B trading days, ranging from 1 to 30 trading days. The trading with longer holding
periods is overlapping and the fraction 1 /B is invested based on new weights every trading day.
Assuming log returns, this is equivalent to the portfolio weights
wR,B-days
t = 1
B
B−1∑
l=0
wR
t−l.
Panel A in Figure 12 shows the annualized out-of-sample Sharpe ratio, mean return and volatil-
ity for diﬀerent overlapping holding periods. Daily trading indeed generates the highest payoﬀ in
terms of mean returns and Sharpe ratios. The half-life in terms of Sharpe ratios is around seven
trading days. In fact, the Sharpe ratio is still above one with a one month (22 business days)
holding period, when using signals estimated with a 1-day trading objective. As expected, the
lower trading frequency can reduce the volatility. This shows that statistical arbitrage is long-lived
and persists for several days and even weeks. We also include the results, when we change the
estimation to optimize the Sharpe ratio of the overlapping multi-horizon holding periods. It is
possible to achieve out-of-sample Sharpe ratios around 1.5 with a one month holding period, when
directly optimizing for longer holding periods. The mean returns for a strategy based on the B-day
trading objective decline less than for a 1-day trading objective. For longer horizons this comes at
the cost of a slightly higher variance. For shorter horizons, the B-day trading objective reduces the
variance by taking advantage of additional diversiﬁcation.
Overlapping trading generates diversiﬁcation eﬀects between strategies. It is a valid measure
of how fast signals are dying out, but it is still implicitly based on daily trading. Optimizing for a
longer holding period can take advantage of this diversiﬁcation eﬀects and increase the mean return
without strongly increasing the variance. This is one reason why we can maintain Sharpe ratios of
1.5 for one month holding periods.
An alternative analysis actually trades only every B days without overlap. As there are B
diﬀerent starting days, this yields B possible implementations of a B-day holding strategy. We
41

## Page 43

Figure 12: Performance for Longer Holding Periods
PANEL A: Overlapping Trading
(a) Sharpe ratio
 (b) Mean Return
 (c) Volatility
PANEL B: Non-overlapping Trading
(d) Sharpe ratio
 (e) Mean Return
 (f) Volatility
These ﬁgures show the annualized out-of-sample Sharpe ratio, mean return and volatility for diﬀerent holding periods for our
empirical benchmark model, which is the CNN+Transformer model based on IPCA 5-factor residuals. An investment with
weightswR
t is held for B trading days, ranging from 1 to 30 trading days. The blue line indicates a model that is estimated
with a daily trading objective (that is, our baseline model), while the orange line displays a model that is estimated with a
B-holding day objective. In panel A the trading with longer holding periods is overlapping and the fraction 1 /B is invested
based on new weights every trading day. In panel B, we estimate for a holding period of B days, the performance of the
B diﬀerent trading strategies starting at diﬀerent days and report the average results. Hence, panel B reports results for
non-overlapping portfolios. The out-of-sample trading period is between January 2002 and December 2016.
report the average performance for each of the possible B starting days, that is, we average the
performance metrics, but do not create a portfolio of overlapping returns. Panel B in Figure 12
shows the corresponding results. By construction, the mean returns for weights based on the 1-day
trading objective are identical to overlapping trading. The diﬀerence between the two analyses
comes from the variance. The overlapping trading generates large diversiﬁcation beneﬁts, which
are not achieved with the separate non-overlapping trading. As a result the Sharpe ratios for non-
overlapping trading are lower. However, even with a one month (22 business days) holding period,
we still achieve an out-of-sample Sharpe ratio of around 0.5. There is little improvement when
optimizing the trading for a longer holding period with non-overlapping trading.
Overall, we have two main ﬁndings. First, arbitrageurs do indeed correct prices quickly. Depend-
ing on the analysis around half of the Sharpe ratio vanishes after one or two weeks. Arbitrageurs
do engage in arbitrage trading as signals do eventually die out. Second, a large fraction of the
statistical arbitrage signal is persistent. Even with holding periods of over one month, the signals
42

## Page 44

can be highly proﬁtable. This has important economic implications. The persistence in arbitrage
signals could be explained by the limited capacity of arbitrageurs, that is, arbitrageurs might have
insuﬃcient capital to fully exploit temporal mispricing quickly. An alternative explanation could
relate to strategic trading. Arbitrageurs might try to take advantage of temporal mispricing, while
at the same time limit their market impact to avoid revealing their detected signal. A third expla-
nation could relate to behavioral trading. In the presence of noise traders or uninformed traders,
the adjustment of prices also depends on how quickly the non-arbitrageurs adjust their expecta-
tions. The persistence of arbitrage has also practical implications. It explains our ﬁndings from
Section III.J, why statistical arbitrage can also be exploited in the presence of transaction costs by
avoiding frequent trading.
N. Estimated Structure
What are the patterns that our CNN+Transformer model can learn and exploit? In order
to answer this question, we analyze the diﬀerent building blocks of our benchmark model and
show their structure on representative and informative residuals inputs. Our goal is to ascertain,
characterize, and explain the role that the convolutional features and attention heads play in the
determination of the ﬁnal allocation weight and recognition of salient time series patterns. The
benchmark model for this section is the CNN+Transformer based on IPCA 5-factor residuals and
a Sharpe ratio objective. The model is calibrated on the ﬁrst 8 years of data and kept constant,
which allows us to study the signal and allocation function.
As an illustrative example, Figure 13 shows the allocation and return on representative residuals.
The left subplot displays an out-of-sample time-series of cumulative returns of a randomly selected
residual and its value in the allocation function. We normalize the allocation weight to have an
absolute value of one, that is, for this illustrative example we only trade this particular residual.
The right subplots depicts the payoﬀ of trading the speciﬁc residual with the displayed allocation
function. The ﬁrst residual shows mean-reversion patterns, which are successfully detected and
exploited by the function wϵ|CNN+Trans. The second residual has a downward trend, which is
also correctly detected and taken advantage of by the model. 18 These examples suggest that the
CNN+Transformer model can learn mean-reversion and trend patterns. Figures A.2 and A.3 are
further examples with the same takeaways.
Next, we “dissect” the CNN+Transformer model to understand what type of functions it can
estimate. Our analysis begins with the eight basic convolutional patterns learned by the convo-
lutional layers of our network, which are displayed in Figure 14. The CNN represents a given
time-series as a matrix of exposures to local basic patterns. As explained in Section II.D.3, these
local ﬁlters are more complicated than simple local linear ﬁlters, but we can project our CNN ﬁlters
into two-dimensional orthogonal linear ﬁlters, which are more interpretable. These local patterns
are the building blocks to construct global patterns. We see that these basic patterns display a
18Note that our in our empirical study the model trades in all residuals and is not limited to trade only in one
residual. Hence, the empirical performance is substantially better as shown in Figure 5.
43

## Page 45

Figure 13: Examples of Allocation and Returns of CNN+Transformer Strategy
These plots display representative examples of the CNN+Transformer out-of-sample arbitrage trading on a sample of residuals
from the IPCA 5-factor model. The left subplots show the normalized cumulative returns of the residuals and the normalized
allocation weight, which the speciﬁc residual has in the trading strategy. The right subplots illustrates the payoﬀ of trading
the speciﬁc residual with the displayed allocation function. The model is calibrated on the ﬁrst 8 years of data and kept
constant.
variety of salient price behavior which are considered to be important. Basic patterns 4 and 6
capture local upward trends, basic patterns 3 and 7 track local downward trends and basic pat-
terns 1, 5 and 8 learn reversion patterns. However, the basis patterns do not include very spiked,
sharp changes. Overall, the building blocks seem to be suﬃcient to construct any smooth trend
and mean-reversion pattern.
We can understand the global patterns learned by the transformer by studying the attention
function. The attention functions αi(.,. ) of each attention head i = 1,...,H = 4 capture the
dependencies between the local patterns. Our arbitrage signal can be interpreted as “loadings” to
these “attention factors”. We use the same H attention functions for all residuals, but in order to
visualize them, we evaluate them for a given residual time-series, which yield the attention weights
per head:
αi,j =αi (˜xL, ˜xj) for i = 1,...,H.
As our signal only depends on the ﬁnal cumulative return projection hproj
L , the attention weights
αi,j for i = 1,..,H and j = 1,...,L contain all the “global factor” information. Hence, we will
plot the H×L dimensional attention weights of the attention heads to understand which global
44

## Page 46

Figure 14: Local Basic Patterns of Benchmark Model
(a) Basic pattern 1
 (b) Basic pattern 2
 (c) Basic pattern 3
 (d) Basic pattern 4
(e) Basic pattern 5
 (f) Basic pattern 6
 (g) Basic pattern 7
 (h) Basic pattern 8
These ﬁgures show theD = 8 local ﬁlters of the CNN estimated for the benchmark model in our empirical analysis. These are
projections of our higher dimensional nonlinear ﬁlter from a 2-layer CNN into two-dimensional linear ﬁlters. These building
blocks are labeled “basic patterns”. The benchmark model is the CNN+Transformer model based on IPCA 5-factor residuals.
We estimate the model on only once on the ﬁrst Ttrain=8 years based on the Sharpe ratio objective.
patterns are activated by speciﬁc time-series.
Figure 15 plots the attention head weights for simulated sinusoidal residual input time-series.
Note that the attention head weights discover the sinusoidal pattern although the model was es-
timated on the empirical data and not speciﬁcally trained for this simulated input. The diﬀerent
attention heads capture diﬀerent patterns. The fourth attention head displayed in red has the
strongest activation and capture high-frequency mean reversion patterns. These attention head
weights are positive for negative realizations. We will label these fourth attention head weights a
“negative reversal” pattern. The third attention head weights depicted by the green curve co-move
with the mean-reversion patterns of the original time-series, that is they are positive for high values,
but seem to be only activated if this positive “hilltop” appears at the beginning of the time-series.
If the mean-reversion cycle achieves its positive values at the end, the third attention head is not
activated. We will label these third attention head weights the “early reversal” pattern. The ﬁrst
attention head in blue seems to be a “dampened” version of the fourth red attention head. Figure
A.4 in the Appendix shows additional simulated input time-series that conﬁrm this interpretation.
In summary, the diﬀerent attention head weights can be assigned to speciﬁc global patterns.
In Figure 16, we plot the diﬀerent components of the CNN+Transformer model evaluated on a
randomly selected, representative 30-day empirical residual. The cumulative residual in subﬁgure
(a) is the input to the CNN. This L = 30 dimensional vector is represented by the CNN in terms
of its “exposure” to local basic pattern. The subﬁgures (d)–(k) show this D×L dimensional
representation, which is the output of the CNN. As we have D = 8 local ﬁlters, we obtain eight
time-series that display the activation to each ﬁlter. For example, basic pattern 1 is associated with
45

## Page 47

Figure 15: Example Attention Weights for Sinusoidal Residual Inputs
(a) Input residual and attention head weights for xl = sin
(
2π l
30
)
(b) Input residual and attention head weights for for xl = sin
(
2πl+15
30
)
These plots show the attention head weights of the CNN+Transformer benchmark model for simulated sinusoidal residual
input time series. Both sine functions have a cycle of 30 days and the second is shifted by 15 days. The right subplot
shows the attention weights for the H = 4 attention heads for the speciﬁc residuals. The empirical benchmark model is the
CNN+Transformer model based on IPCA 5-factor residuals. We estimate the model only once on the ﬁrst Ttrain=8 years
based on the Sharpe ratio objective.
a “reversal kink” in subﬁgure 14(a) and hence has the strongest activation to this basic pattern
on day 28, when the residual has a downward spike. This D×L matrix of exposures to local
patterns is the input to the transformer. The attention head weights in subﬁgure (b) connect
the local patterns to a global pattern. The fourth attention head weight in red has its highest
values during the “bottom” of the residual movements, conﬁrming our previous intuition that this
attention head activates during bad times. The third attention head weight in green spikes during
the “top” at the beginning of the residual time-series, which is in line with our interpretation as an
early reversal pattern. The ﬁrst attention head in blue is a dampened version of the red attention
head. The average over the four attention head weights depicted in subﬁgure (c) suggests that the
heads attend on average more closely to the latter half of the time series.
In Figure 17 we generalize the analysis of Figure 16 to study the model structure of the bench-
mark model over time. While Figure 16 represents a “snapshot” for one point in time, we now
display the allocation weights and attention head weights of a single representative residual for
diﬀerent times. Subﬁgure 17(a) shows the cumulative residual time-series. For a speciﬁc point in
time we use the lagged L = 30 days as an input to obtain the allocation weights and attention
head weights for that time. The out-of-sample allocation weights correctly change the directions
to exploit the patterns in the residual time-series. The attention head weights over time oﬀer ad-
ditional insights into the structure of the global patterns. Each vertical slice from window index 1
46

## Page 48

Figure 16: CNN+Transformer Model Structure for Representative Residual
(a) Cumulative residual
 (b) Attention weights per head
 (c) Average attention weights
(d) CNN activations for
basic pattern 1
(e) CNN activations for
basic pattern 2
(f) CNN activations for
basic pattern 3
(g) CNN activations for
basic pattern 4
(h) CNN activations for
basic pattern 5
(i) CNN activations for
basic pattern 6
(j) CNN activations for
basic pattern 7
(k) CNN activations for
basic pattern 8
These ﬁgures illustrate the diﬀerent components of the CNN+Transformer benchmark model evaluated for a randomly selected,
representative empirical residual. The cumulative residual returns, which are the input to the model, are plotted in (a). The
convolutional activations (d)–(k) quantify the exposure of the residual time-series to local basis ﬁlters. Subplot (b) displays
the attention weights for the H = 4 attention heads, which represent global dependency patterns. Subplot (c) shows the
average of these four attention head weights. The empirical benchmark model is the CNN+Transformer model based on
IPCA 5-factor residuals. We estimate the model on only once on the ﬁrst Ttrain=8 years based on the Sharpe ratio objective.
to window index 30 displays the normalized attention weights for the time point under the slice.
The third attention head, which was displayed in green in Figures 15 and 16 has the largest val-
ues during “up-patterns” of the residual, for example for 2007, 2010 and 2012. Importantly, the
attention weights focus on the early days within the 30-day window. This conﬁrms our previous
interpretation as an “early reversal” pattern. Attention head four, which was previously repre-
sented as a red line, has the highest values during down-times, such as 2009, 2014 and the middle
of 2016. In contrast to attention head 3, this head focuses on the immediate past within the local
window. Attention head 1, which is a dampened down-version, focuses more uniformly on all the
values within the local window.
The average attention weights in (b) illustrate the asymmetric response of the transformer net-
work. During uptrends, it focuses on the residual prices which are further in the past part of the
47

## Page 49

Figure 17: CNN+Transformer Model Structure for Representative Residual Over Time
(a) Cumulative residuals
 (b) Average attention weights
 (c) Allocation weights
(d) Attention weights for
head 1
(e) Attention weights for
head 2
(f) Attention weights for
head 3
(g) Attention weights for
head 4
These ﬁgures illustrate the out-of-sample behavior from 2006 to 2016 of the CNN+Transformer benchmark model for a single
residual time-series. The cumulative residual returns are plotted in (a), and the suggested allocation weights before cross-
sectional normalization are plotted in (c). The attention head weights (d)–(g) quantify the activation for each attention head
over time. Subplot (b) shows the average of these weights over the four heads for diﬀerent times. All time-series have been
smoothed using a simple moving average with a 30-day window for better presentation. The empirical benchmark model is
the CNN+Transformer model based on IPCA 5-factor residuals. We estimate the model on only once on the ﬁrst Ttrain=8
years based on the Sharpe ratio objective.
Figure 18: Variable Importance for Allocation Weight
(a) Importance of Local Basic Patterns
 (b) Importance of Residual Days
These ﬁgures show the normalized average absolute gradient (NAAG) of the allocation weight with respect to various inputs
to intermediate layers in the CNN+Transformer benchmark network. A higher NAAG indicates a higher importance. Subplot
(a) quantiﬁes the importance of the D = 8 diﬀerent convolutional ﬁlters, that is, we display the gradient with respect to the
output of the convolutional network, which is the input to the self-attention layer. In (b), we report the importance of the
ﬁrst 27 days of the input residual time series. Each average absolute gradient is normalized by dividing each element by the
sum of all elements. The empirical benchmark model is the CNN+Transformer model based on IPCA 5-factor residuals. We
estimate the model on only once on the ﬁrst Ttrain=8 years based on the Sharpe ratio objective.
window to decide which to position to take; however, during downtrends, it focuses on the most re-
48

## Page 50

cent cumulative residual prices in the lookback window, which indicates that it is taking into account
the latest data in order to decide what position to take. This indicates that our CNN+Transformer
policy network has learned to act swiftly during downtrends, and more slowly during uptrends.
This shows that our model learns in particular the commonly repeated wisdom that “markets take
escalators up and elevators down”. This asymmetric policy is a key beneﬁt of the attention-based
model, which cannot easily be replicated by the parametric Ornstein-Uhlenbeck or ﬁxed basis pat-
tern benchmark models we compare against. The convolutional subnetwork’s patterns provide
translation invariant information about what kind of trend is present within each 3-day subwindow
of the 30-day cumulative residual price lookback window, which allows the transformer subnetwork
to form a stable attention function that results in this unique policy.
Figure 18 sheds further light on which days and patterns are important. The ﬁgure shows
the normalized average absolute gradient (NAAG) of the allocation weight with respect to various
inputs to intermediate layers in the CNN+Transformer benchmark network. A higher NAAG
indicates a higher importance. Subplot (a) quantiﬁes the importance of the D = 8 diﬀerent basic
patterns. We observe that the ﬂat basic pattern 2 has a negligible weight, while basis patterns that
are needed for trend or reversal patterns have high importance. In (b), we report the importance
of the ﬁrst 27 days of the input residual time series. 19 Crucially, all previous days matter, which
emphasizes that the trading allocation depends on the past dynamics. The most recent 14 days
seem to get on average more attention for the trading decisions. However, as indicated in Figure
17, the importance of the days seems to be asymmetric for diﬀerent global patterns.
IV. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce a unifying conceptual framework to compare diﬀerent statistical
arbitrage approaches based on the decomposition into (1) arbitrage portfolio generation, (2) sig-
nal extraction and (3) allocation decision. We develop a novel deep learning statistical arbitrage
approach. It uses conditional latent factors to generate arbitrage portfolios. The signal is esti-
mated with a CNN+Transformer, which combines global dependency patterns with local ﬁlters.
The allocation is estimated with a nonparametric FFN based on a global trading objective.
We conduct a comprehensive empirical out-of-sample study on U.S. equities and demonstrate
the potential of machine learning methods in arbitrage trading. Our CNN+Transformer substan-
tially outperforms all benchmark approaches. The implied trading strategies are not spanned by
conventional risk factors, including price trend factors, and survive realistic transaction and holding
costs. Our model provides insights into optimal trading policies which are based on asymmetric
trend and reversion patterns. In particular, our study shows that the trading signal extraction is
the most challenging and separating element among diﬀerent statistical arbitrage approaches.
Our ﬁndings contribute to the debate on eﬃciency of markets. We quantify the scope of proﬁts
that arbitrageurs can achieve in equity markets. Importantly, the substantial proﬁtability of our
19As the attention head weights are determined relative to the last local 3-day window, that subwindow has
mechanically a larger weight and is not comparable to the other 27 days.
49

## Page 51

arbitrage strategies is not inconsistent with equilibrium asset pricing, following similar arguments
as in Gatev et al. (2006). It could rather be viewed as empirical evidence about how eﬃciency is
maintained in practice. We document non-declining proﬁtability of arbitrage trading over time,
which suggests that the proﬁts are compensation for arbitrageurs to enforce the law of one price.
REFERENCES
A vellaneda, M. and J.-H. Lee (2010): “Statistical arbitrage in the US equities market,” Quantitative
Finance, 10, 761–782.
Bali, T. G., A. Goyal, D. Huang, F. Jiang, and Q. Wen (2022): “Predicting Corporate Bond Returns:
Merton Meets Machine Learning,” Working paper.
Barr, A. (2007): “Quant quake shakes hedge-fund giants,” Marketwatch.
Bianchi, D., M. B ¨uchner, and A. Tamoni (2019): “Bond risk premia with machine learning,” Working
paper.
Boyd, S., E. Busseti, S. Diamond, R. N. Kahn, K. Koh, P. Nystrup, J. Speth, et al. (2017):
“Multi-period trading via convex optimization,” Foundations and Trends in Optimization , 3, 1–76.
Bryzgalova, S., M. Pelger, and J. Zhu (2019): “Forest through the Trees: Building Cross-Sections of
Stock Returns,” Working paper.
Carhart, M. M. (1997): “On persistence in mutual fund performance.” Journal of Finance , 52, 57–82.
Cartea, A. and S. Jaimungal (2016): “Algorithmic trading of co-integrated assets,” International Jour-
nal of Theoretical and Applied Finance , 19, 165038.
Chen, L., M. Pelger, and J. Zhu (2022): “Deep learning in asset pricing,” Management Science,
forthcoming.
Chen, Y., W. Chen, and S. Huang (2018): “Developing Arbitrage Strategy in High-frequency Pairs
Trading with Filterbank CNN Algorithm,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Agents (ICA) ,
113–116.
Cong, L., K. Tang, J. W ang, and Y. Zhang (2020): “Single-Step Portfolio Construction through
Reinforcement Learning and Economically Interpretable AI,” Working paper.
d’Aspremont, A. (2011): “Identifying small mean-reverting portfolios,” Quantitative Finance, 11, 351–364.
DeMiguel, V., J. Gil-Bazo, F. Nogales, and A. Santos (2022): “Machine Learning and Fund Char-
acteristics Help to Select Mutual Funds with Positive Alpha,” Working paper.
Dunis, C., J. Laws, and B. Evans (2006): “Modelling and trading the soybean-oil crush spread with
recurrent and higher order networks: a comparative analysis,” Neural Network World , 16, 193–213.
Ebrahimi, H. (2013): “Hedge fund quants lose money in 2012,” The Telegraph.
Elliott, R., J. V an Der Hoek, and W. Malcolm (2005): “Pairs trading,” Quantitative Finance, 5,
513–545.
F ama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993): “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,”
Journal of.
——— (2015): “A ﬁve-factor asset pricing model,” Journal of ﬁnancial economics , 116, 1–22.
50

## Page 52

Fischer, T. G., C. Krauss, and A. Deinert (2019): “Statistical arbitrage in cryptocurrency markets,”
Journal of Risk and Financial Management , 12, 31.
Freyberger, J., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber (2020): “Dissecting characteristics nonparametrically,”
Review of Financial Studies , 33, 2326–2377.
Gatev, E., W. N. Goetzmann, and K. Rouwenhorst (2006): “Pairs trading: performance of a relative-
value arbitrage rule,” Review of Financial Studies , 19, 797–827.
Giglio, S. and D. Xiu (2021): “Asset Pricing with Omitted Factors,” Journal of Political Economy , 129,
1947–1990.
Gu, S., B. Kelly, and D. Xiu (2021): “Autoencoder Asset Pricing Models,” Journal of Econometrics ,
222, 429–450.
Gu, S., B. T. Kelly, and D. Xiu (2020): “Empirical Asset Pricing Via Machine Learning,” Review of
Financial Studies, 33, 2223–2273.
He, A., S. He, D. Huang, and G. Zhou (2022): “Testing Asset Pricing Models Using Pricing Error
Information,” Working paper.
Huck, N. (2009): “Pairs selection and outranking: An application to the S&P 100 index,” European Journal
of Operational Research, 196, 819–825.
Jiang, J., B. Kelly, and D. Xiu (2022): “(Re-)Imag(in)ing Price Trends,” Journal of Finance, forthcom-
ing.
Jurek, J. W. and H. Yang (2007): “Dynamic portfolio selection in arbitrage,” in EFA 2006 Meetings
Paper.
Kaniel, R., Z. Lin, M. Pelger, and S. V an Nieuwerburgh (2022): “Machine-Learning the Skill of
Mutual Fund Managers,” Working paper.
Kelly, B., S. Pruitt, and Y. Su (2019): “Characteristics Are Covariances: A Uniﬁed Model of Risk and
Return,” Journal of Financial Economics , 134, 501–524.
Kim, T. and H. Y. Kim (2019): “Optimizing the Pairs-Trading Strategy Using Deep Reinforcement Learn-
ing with Trading and Stop-Loss Boundaries,” Complexity, 2019.
Kozak, S., S. Nagel, and S. Santosh (2020): “Shrinking the Cross Section,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 135, 271–292.
Krauss, C., X. A. Doa, and N. Huck (2017): “Deep neural networks, gradient-boosted trees, random
forests: Statistical arbitrage on the S&P 500,” European Journal of Operational Research, 259, 689–702.
Lettau, M. and M. Pelger (2020a): “Estimating Latent Asset Pricing Factors,” Journal of Econometrics,
218, 1–31.
——— (2020b): “Factors that Fit the Time-Series and Cross-Section of Stock Returns,” Review of Financial
Studies, 33, 2274–2325.
Leung, T. and X. Li (2015): “Optimal mean reversion trading with transaction costs and stop-loss exit,”
International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance , 18, 1550020.
Li, S. and Y. Tang (2022): “Automated Risk Forecasting,” Working paper.
Lim, B. and S. Zohren (2020): “Time Series Forecasting With Deep Learning: A Survey,” Working paper.
Lintilhac, P. S. and A. Tourin (2016): “Model-based pairs trading in the bitcoin markets,” Quantitative
Finance, 17, 703–716.
51

## Page 53

Mudchanatongsuk, S., J. A. Primbs, and W. Wong (2008): “Optimal pairs trading: A stochastic
control approach,” in 2008 American Control Conference, IEEE, 1035–1039.
Mulvey, J. M., Y. Sun, M. W ang, and J. Ye (2020): “Optimizing a portfolio of mean-reverting assets
with transaction costs via a feedforward neural network,” Quantitative Finance, forthcoming.
Murray, S., H. Xiao, and Y. Xia (2021): “Charting By Machines,” Working paper.
Pelger, M. (2020): “Understanding Systematic Risk: A High-Frequency Approach,” Journal of Finance ,
74, 2179–2220.
Pelger, M. and R. Xiong (2020): “Interpretable Sparse Proximate Factors for Large Dimensions,” Jour-
nal of Business & Economic Statistics, Conditionally accepted .
——— (2021): “Interpretable sparse proximate factors for large dimensions,” Journal of Business & Eco-
nomic Statistics, conditionally accepted .
Rad, H., R. K. Y. Low, and R. F aff (2016): “The proﬁtability of pairs trading strategies: distance,
cointegration and copula methods,” Quantitative Finance, 16, 1541–1558.
V aswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polo-
sukhin (2017): “Attention Is All You Need,”NIPS Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Vidyamurthy, G. (2004): Pairs Trading: Quantitative Methods and Analysis , Wiley.
Xiaohong Chen and H. White (1999): “Improved rates and asymptotic normality for nonparametric
neural network estimators,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 45, 682–691.
Yeo, J. and G. Papanicolaou (2017): “Risk control of mean-reversion time in statistical arbitrage,” Risk
and Decision Analysis, 6, 263–290.
52

## Page 54

Appendix A. Data
Appendix A. List of the Firm-Speciﬁc Characteristics
Table A.I: Firm Characteristics by Category
Past Returns Value
(1) r2 1 Short-term momentum (26) A2ME Assets to market cap
(2) r12 2 Momentum (27) BEME Book to Market Ratio
(3) r12 7 Intermediate momentum (28) C Ratio of cash and short-term
investments to total assets
(4) r36 13 Long-term momentum (29) CF Free Cash Flow to Book Value
(5) ST Rev Short-term reversal (30) CF2P Cashﬂow to price
(6) LT Rev Long-term reversal (31) D2P Dividend Yield
(32) E2P Earnings to price
Investment (33) Q Tobin’s Q
(7) Investment Investment (34) S2P Sales to price
(8) NOA Net operating assets (35) Lev Leverage
(9) DPI2A Change in property, plants, and
equipment
(10) NI Net Share Issues Trading Frictions
(36) AT Total Assets
Proﬁtability (37) Beta CAPM Beta
(11) PROF Proﬁtability (38) IdioVol Idiosyncratic volatility
(12) ATO Net sales over lagged net operating assets (39) LME Size
(13) CTO Capital turnover (40) LTurnover Turnover
(14) FC2Y Fixed costs to sales (41) MktBeta Market Beta
(15) OP Operating proﬁtability (42) Rel2High Closeness to past year high
(16) PM Proﬁt margin (43) Resid Var Residual Variance
(17) RNA Return on net operating assets (44) Spread Bid-ask spread
(18) ROA Return on assets (45) SUV Standard unexplained volume
(19) ROE Return on equity (46) Variance Variance
(20) SGA2S Selling, general and administrative
expenses to sales
(21) D2A Capital intensity
Intangibles
(22) AC Accrual
(23) OA Operating accruals
(24) OL Operating leverage
(25) PCM Price to cost margin
This table shows the 46 ﬁrm-speciﬁc characteristics sorted into six categories. More details on the construction are in the
Internet Appendix of Chen et al. (2022).
Appendix B. Implementation of Diﬀerent Models
Appendix A. Feedforward Neural Network (FFN)
In the Fourier+FFN and FFN models, we utilize a feedforward network with LFFN layers as
illustrated in Figure A.1. Each hidden layer takes the output from the previous layer and transforms
53

## Page 55

it into an output as
x(l) = ReLU
(
W FFN,(l−1)⊤x(l−1) +wFFN,(l−1)
0
)
= ReLU

wFFN,(l−1)
0 +
K(l−1)
∑
k=1
wFFN,(l−1)
k x(l−1)
k


y =W FFN,(LFFN)⊤x(L) +wFFN,(LFFN)
0
with hidden layer outputsx(l) = (x(l)
1 ,...,x (l)
K(l))∈ R K(l)
, parametersW (FFN,l) = (wFFN,(l)
1 ,...,w FFN,(l)
K(l) )∈
R K(l)×K(l−1)
for l = 0,...,L FFN− 1 and W FFN,(LFFN)∈ R K(L)
, and where ReLU(xk) = max(xk, 0).
Figure A.1. Feedforward Network Architecture
Appendix B. Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Model
Following Avellaneda and Lee (2010) and Yeo and Papanicolaou (2017) we model Xt as an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process
dXt =κ (µ−Xt)dt +σdBt
for a Brownian motion Bt. As the analytical solution of the above stochastic diﬀerential equation
is
Xt+∆t = (1−e−κ∆t)µ +e−κ∆tXt +σ
∫ t+∆t
t
e−κ(t+∆t−s)dBs
for any ∆t, we can without loss of generality set ∆ t = 1, and estimate the parameters κ,µ and σ
from the AR(1) model
Xt+1 =a +bXt +et,
54

## Page 56

where each et is a normal, independent and identically distributed random variable with mean 0.
The parameters are estimated with a standard linear regression, which yields
ˆκ =−log(ˆb)
∆t , ˆµ = ˆa
1− ˆb
, ˆσ√
2ˆκ
=
√
ˆσ2e
1− ˆb2.
The strategy depends on the ratio XL−ˆµ
ˆσ
√
2ˆκ . Note that this is only deﬁned for b< 1 which is equivalent
to parameter restrictions that the OU process is mean-reverting. The trading policy depends on the
thresholdscthresh andccrit, which are hyperparameters. These hyperparameters are selected on the
validation data from the candidate values cthresh∈{ 1, 1.25, 1.5} and ccrit∈{ 0.25, 0.5, 0.75}. Our
benchmark model has the values cthresh = 1.25 and ccrit = 0.25, which coincides with the optimal
values in Avellaneda and Lee (2010) and Yeo and Papanicolaou (2017).
Appendix C. Convolutional Neural Network with Transformer
Appendix C.1. Convolutional Neural Network
In our empirical application, we consider a 2-layered convolutional network with some standard
technical additions. The network takes as input a window x(0) = x∈ RL of L consecutive daily
cumulative returns or log prices of a residual, and outputs the feature matrix ˜ x∈ RL×F given by
computing the following quantities for l = 1,...,L,d = 1...,D
y(0)
l,d =b(0)
d +
Dsize∑
m=1
W (0)
d,mx(0)
l−m+1, x (1)
l,d = ReLU

y(0)
1,d−µ(0)
d
σ(0)
d

. (A.1)
y(1)
l,d =b(1)
d +
Dsize∑
m=1
D∑
j=1
W (1)
d,j,mx(1)
l−m+1,j, x (2)
l,d = ReLU

y(1)
l,d−µ(1)
d
σ(1)
d

, (A.2)
˜xl,d =x(2)
l,d +x(0)
l , (A.3)
where
µ(i)
k = 1
L
L∑
l=1
y(i)
l,k, σ (i)
k =
√ 1
L
L∑
l=1
(
y(i)
l,k−µ(i)
k
)2
.
and b(0),b (1) ∈ RD, W(0) ∈ RD×Dsize and W (1) ∈ RD×D×Dsize are parameters to be estimated.
Compared with the simple convolutional network introduced in the main text, the previous equa-
tions incorporate three standard technical improvements commonly used in deep learning practice.
First, they include “bias terms” b(i) in the ﬁrst part of equations A.1 and A.2 to allow for more
ﬂexible modeling. Second, they include so-called “instance normalization” before each activation
function to speed up the optimization and avoid vanishing gradients caused by the saturation of
the ReLU activations. Third, they include a “residual connection” in equation A.3 to facilitate
gradient propagation during training.
55

## Page 57

Appendix C.2. Transformer Network
The benchmark model in our empirical application is a one-layer transformer, following the
implementation of the seminal paper of Vaswani et al. (2017). First, the sequence of features
˜x∈ RL×D is projected onto D/H-dimensional subspaces (called the “attention heads”) for an
integerH dividing D, obtaining, for 1≤i≤H,
Vi = ˜xWV
i +bV
i ∈ RL×D/H, K i = ˜xWK
i +bK
i ∈ RL×D/H, Q i = ˜xWQ
i +bQ
i ∈ RL×D/H,
where WV
i ,W K
i ,W Q
i ∈ RD×F/H , bV
i ,bK
i ,bQ
i ∈ RD/H are parameters to be estimated. Next, each
projection Vi is processed temporally obtaining the hidden states hi∈ RL×D/H, with
hi,l =
L∑
j=1
wl,j,iVi,j∈ RD/H, w l,j,i = exp(Ki,l·Qi,j)∑L
m=1 exp(Ki,l·Qi,m)
∈ [0, 1] l = 1,...,L and i = 1,...,D/H.
These states are then concatenated and linearly combined, obtaining the last hidden state
h = Concat(h1,...,h h)WO +bO∈ RL×D,
where WO∈ RF×F,bO∈ RF are parameters to be estimated.
Finally, h is normalized and processed time-wise though a 2-layered feedforward network as
described in detail in the original paper (Vaswani et al. (2017)). The number of hidden units in the
intermediate layer is a technical hyperparameter that we call HDN in section C.A. This network
also has dropout regularization with hyperparameter called DRP in section C.A.
Appendix D. Network Estimation Details
As explained in Section II.C, we estimate the parameters of the models with neural networks
by solving the optimization problems introduced in equation (4) or in equation (6) of section II.C,
depending on the model and the objective function. In all cases, this is done by replacing the
mean and variance by their annualized sample counterpart over a training set, and by ﬁnding the
optimal network parameters with stochastic gradient descent using PyTorch’s Adam optimizer and
the optimization hyperparameters learning rate and number of optimization epochs described in
detail in section C.A.
As mentioned in Section III.C, our main results use rolling windows of 1,000 days as training sets.
The networks are reestimated every 125 days to strike a balance between computational eﬃciency
and adaptation to changing economic conditions, and the strategies’ returns are always obtained
out-of-sample. Additionally, to be able to train our model over these long windows without running
into memory issues, we split each training window into temporal “batches”, as is commonly done
in deep learning applications. Each batch contains the returns and residuals for all the stocks in a
subwindow of 125 days of the original training window, with the subwindows being consecutive and
non-overlapping (i.e., for a training window of 1000 days, we split it into the subwindow containing
56

## Page 58

the ﬁrst 125 days, the subwindow containing the days between the 126th day and the 250th day,
etc.). The optimization process is applied successively to each batch, completing the full sequence
of batches before starting a new optimization iteration or epoch.
In the implementation of our optimization procedure under market frictions, we found it useful
to include the last allocation as an additional input to the allocation function wϵ, as the inclusion
of the cost term makes the objective function depend on it. However, the inclusion of the previous
allocations in either the objective function or the architecture of the model complicates the paral-
lelization of the training and evaluation computations, because after this change the model requires
the output of previous lookback window in order to compute the output of the current window. To
allow training to remain parallelized, which is desirable for reasonable computational speed given
the volume of data of our empirical application, in our implementation of the training function in
each epoch, we take the previous allocations from the output of the previous epoch and use them
as a pre-computed approximation of the allocations for the current epoch. This approximation
converges in our empirical experiments and allows us to maintain parallelization, but may produce
suboptimal results. For evaluation purposes, however, everything is computed exactly and with no
approximations using a sequential approach.
Throughout section III, all presented results have been computed with PyTorch 1.5 and have
been parallelized across 8 NVIDIA GeForce GTX Titan V GPUs, on a server with two Intel Xeon
E5-2698v3 32-core CPUs and 1 TB of RAM. The full rationale for the hyperparameter choices are
described in detail in section C.A, but for a CNN+Transformer model with a lookback window of
30 days, 8 convolutional ﬁlters with a ﬁlter size of 2, 4 attention heads, 125-day reestimation using
a rolling lookback window of 1000, it takes our deep model approximately 7 hours to be periodically
estimated and run in our 19 years of daily out-of-sample data with our universe of on average∼550
stocks per month.
Appendix C. Additional Empirical Results
Appendix A. Robustness to Hyperparameter Selection
In this subsection, we describe our hyperparameter selection procedure and explore additional
hyperparameter choices to show that the performance of our strategies is extremely robust to our
choices. These results complement the time stability checks we exhibited in Section III.I. To decide
which hyperparameters we would select for use in our network, we ﬁxed a validation dataset as
follows: we took the ﬁrst 1000 trading days of our data set of residuals (all trading days from January
1, 1998 through December 31, 2001) of the 5-factor IPCA-based model, which is estimated with a
20-year rolling window. Because it is solely used for training in our rolling train/test procedures
used to compute strategy returns, this data is completely in-sample, and thus completely avoids
look-ahead bias which would inﬂuence any of our out-of-sample trading results in the main text. We
started with a reasonable set for our hyperparameters, and tested also additional points adjacent
57

## Page 59

Table A.II: Hyperparameter options for the network in the empirical analysis
Notation Hyperparameters Candidates Chosen
D Number of ﬁlters in the convolutional network 8, 16 8
ATT Number of attention heads 2, 4 4
HDN Number of hidden units in the transformer’s linear layer 2D, 3D 2D
DRP Dropout rate in the transformer 0.25, 0.5 0.25
Dsize Filter size in the convolutional network 2 2
LKB Number of days in the residual lookback window 30 30
WDW Number of days in the rolling training window 1000 1000
RTFQ Number of days of the retraining frequency 125 125
BTCH Batch size, in days 125 125
LR Learning rate 0.001 0.001
EPCH Number of optimization epochs 100 100
OPT Optimization method Adam Adam
This table shows the parameters for our network architecture with respect to the Sharpe ratio on our validation data and the
candidates we tried In DRP, we follow the convention that the dropout rate p is the proportion of units which are removed.
to these sets.20 For each model represented by a point on the grid, we trained the model using the
Sharpe ratio objective on the ﬁrst 750 days of the 1000 trading days, and evaluated it by its out-
of-sample Sharpe ratio on the last 250 days of the 1000 trading days. We tested 16 combinations
of hyperparameters, which are illustrated in Table A.II. The results of our test on the last 250 days
of our validation data are displayed in Table A.III.
The results in Table A.III show that all Sharpe ratios fall within a tight range of values, which
is roughly [3.5, 4.2]. Means and volatilities concentrate similarly, falling within [13% , 17.8%] and
[3.6%, 4.3%]. Computation of 95% bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals for mean return shows that
all models’ conﬁdence intervals contain the interval [10%, 20%], with volatilies similarly contained.
Hence, these models are statistically not distinguishable. Given the statistical insigniﬁcance of the
diﬀerences in performance of these models, we chose the model displayed in Table A.II, which is
the most parsimonious one, that is it has the smallest number of parameters, and hence beneﬁts
low GPU memory usage and ease of interpretability.
To ensure that our results are stable across several choices of hyperparameters, we study the re-
sults of four additional models with perturbed hyperparameters. This complements our robustness
results of Section III.I regarding the size of the lookback window and the retraining frequency. The
four additional networks and their hyperparameter conﬁgurations are listed in Table A.IV, with
Network 1 being the network studied throughout this empirical section. Network 2 corresponds to
more ﬁlters and commensurately more hidden units to consume them, and higher dropout rates
to more strongly regularize the additional parameters. Network 3 halves the number of attention
heads from our original speciﬁcation. Networks 4 and 5 modify the size of the rolling training win-
dow from 1000 trading days to 1250 and 750 trading days, respectively, which corresponds closely
to three and ﬁve calendar years. These additional hyperparameter conﬁgurations constitute local
perturbations in hyperparameter space, to which our strategies’ performance are relatively robust.
20Note the computation over a large set of hyperparameters is computationally infeasible, which requires us to
restrict the set to reasonable values.
58

## Page 60

Table A.III: Performance of candidate models on the last year of the validation data set
D ATT HDN DRP SR µ σ
8 2 2 0.25 3.81 16.3% 4.3%
8 2 2 0.50 3.92 16.0% 4.1%
8 2 3 0.25 3.79 16.2% 4.3%
8 2 3 0.50 4.00 16.4% 4.1%
8 4 2 0.25 3.81 15.6% 4.1%
8 4 2 0.50 4.13 17.8% 4.3%
8 4 3 0.25 3.82 15.6% 4.1%
8 4 3 0.50 4.16 17.4% 4.2%
16 2 2 0.25 4.00 14.8% 3.7%
16 2 2 0.50 4.06 16.2% 4.0%
16 2 3 0.25 4.11 14.9% 3.6%
16 2 3 0.50 4.06 16.6% 4.1%
16 4 2 0.25 3.93 15.6% 4.0%
16 4 2 0.50 3.66 13.9% 3.8%
16 4 3 0.25 4.18 16.8% 4.0%
16 4 3 0.50 3.51 13.0% 3.7%
This table shows the model performance with respect to the Sharpe ratio, mean, and volatility on our validation data set
for the candidate models implied by Table A.II. The models are trained on the ﬁrst three years of the validation data set
(1998–2000) and tested on the last year (2001). In DRP, we follow the convention that the dropout rate p is the proportion
of units which are removed.
Table A.IV: Alternative best performing models on the data from 2002–2016
Model FLNB FLSZ ATT HDN DRP LKB WDW
Network 1 [1,8] 2 4 16 0.25 30 1000
Network 2 [1,16] 2 4 32 0.5 30 1000
Network 3 [1,8] 2 2 16 0.25 30 1000
Network 4 [1,8] 2 4 16 0.25 30 1250
Network 5 [1,8] 2 4 16 0.25 30 750
This table reports four of the best performing models for our network architecture with respect to the Sharpe ratio on our data
from 2002–2016 and the candidates described in Table A.II. Our original network, which is studied throughout this section,
is labeled as Network 1.
Table A.V: Performance of the alternative models on our benchmark residual datasets,
2002–2016
Fama-French 5 PCA 5 IPCA 5
Model SR µ σ SR µ σ SR µ σ
Network 1 3.21 4.6% 1.4% 3.36 14.3% 4.2% 4.16 8.7% 2.1%
Network 2 3.16 4.6% 1.4% 3.26 13.9% 4.3% 4.35 8.4% 1.9%
Network 3 3.30 4.8% 1.4% 3.17 13.4% 4.2% 4.00 8.4% 2.1%
Network 4 2.93 4.1% 1.4% 2.74 11.7% 4.3% 3.96 7.9% 2.0%
Network 5 3.13 4.9% 1.6% 3.52 15.0% 4.3% 3.77 8.6% 2.3%
This table shows the average annualized returns, volatilities and Sharpe ratios of our alternative models from Table A.IV on
our three benchmark residual datasets, trained with the Sharpe ratio objective function.
59

## Page 61

In Table A.V, we report the results of these models on a representative subset of 5-factor mod-
els, which are now evaluated on the full out-of-sample data. We see that the Sharpe ratios are
broadly similar across all three diﬀerent perturbations of network architecture hyperparameters
(i.e., number of ﬁlters, number of attention heads, and dropout rate). The small range of values
induced by these choices shows that our network performs similarly over a variety of sensible net-
work parameters, and highlights the eﬃcacy of our reasonable choice of convolutional, attentional,
and feedforward subnetworks which specialize in ﬁnding small temporal patterns, arranging these
patterns throughout time, and deciding on allocations based on these arranged patterns.
For the allocation function feedforward network (FFN) utilized for the Fourier+FFN model,
we choose a reasonable architecture based on deep learning conventions and have veriﬁed that the
results are robust to this choice. Because the input of the network are the L = 30 coeﬃcients of the
Fourier decomposition of each residual window ( X(n,t)
l )1≤l≤L and the output is the corresponding
allocation weight wn,t ∈ R, we follow standard deep learning practices and consider 3 hidden
layers with dimensions 16,8,4 regularized with a dropout rate of 0.25. We use the ReLU activation
function, and train using the same procedure outlined in B.D, with the same batch size, learning
rate, number of optimization epochs, and optimization method as in Table A.II.
60

## Page 62

Appendix B. Interpretation
Figure A.2: Illustrative Example of Allocation Weights and Signals for Diﬀerent Methods
(a) Cumulative residuals xl and
allocation weight wϵ|CNN+Trans
l
(b) Signal θCNN+Trans
l
(c) Cumulative returns of
CNN+Trans strategy
(d) Cumulative residual xl and
allocation weight wϵ|FFT
l
(e) Signal θFFT
l
(f) Cumulative returns of
Fourier+FFN strategy
(g) Cumulative residual xl and
allocation weight wϵ|OU
l
(h) Signal θOU
l
(i) Cumulative returns of
OU+Thresh strategy
These plots are an illustrative example of the allocation weights and signals of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck with Threshold
(OU+Thres), Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) with Feedforward Neural Network (FFN), and Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) with Transformer models for a speciﬁc cumulative residual. The models are estimated on the empirical data, and the
residual is a representative empirical example. In more detail, we consider the residuals from ﬁve IPCA factors and estimate
the benchmark models as explained in Section III.N. The left subplots display the cumulative residual process along with the
out-of-sample allocation weights wϵ|·
l that each model assigns to this speciﬁc residual. In this example, we consider trading
only this speciﬁc residual and hence normalize the weights to {−1, 0, 1}. The middle column plots show the time-series of
estimated out-of-sample signals for each model, by applying the θ·
l arbitrage signal function to the previous L cumulative
returns of the residual. The right column plots display the out-of-sample cumulative returns of trading this particular residual
based on the corresponding allocation weights. We use a rolling lookback window of L = 30 days to estimate the signal and
allocation, which we evaluate for the out-of-sample trading on the next 30 days. The plots only show the out-of-sample period.
The evaluation of this illustrative example is a simpliﬁcation of the general model that we use in our empirical main analysis,
where we trade all residuals and map them back into the original stock returns.
61

## Page 63

Figure A.3: Additional Examples of Allocation Weights and Signals
(a) Cumulative residuals xl and
allocation weight wϵ|CNN+Trans
l
(b) Signal θCNN+Trans
l
(c) Cumulative returns of
CNN+Trans strategy
(d) Cumulative residual xl and
allocation weight wϵ|FFT
l
(e) Signal θFFT
l
(f) Cumulative returns of
Fourier+FFN strategy
(g) Cumulative residual xl and
allocation weight wϵ|OU
l
(h) Signal θOU
l
(i) Cumulative returns of
OU+Thres strategy
These plots are an illustrative example of the allocation weights and signals of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck with Threshold
(OU+Thres), Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) with Feedforward Neural Network (FFN), and Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) with Transformer models for a speciﬁc cumulative residual. The models are estimated on the empirical data, and the
residual is a representative empirical example. In more detail, we consider the residuals from ﬁve IPCA factors and estimate
the benchmark models as explained in Section III.N. The left subplots display the cumulative residual process along with the
out-of-sample allocation weights wϵ|·
l that each model assigns to this speciﬁc residual. In this example, we consider trading
only this speciﬁc residual and hence normalize the weights to {−1, 0, 1}. The middle column plots show the time-series of
estimated out-of-sample signals for each model, by applying the θ·
l arbitrage signal function to the previous L cumulative
returns of the residual. The right column plots display the out-of-sample cumulative returns of trading this particular residual
based on the corresponding allocation weights. We use a rolling lookback window of L = 30 days to estimate the signal and
allocation, which we evaluate for the out-of-sample on the next 30 days. The plots only show the out-of-sample period. The
evaluation of this illustrative example is a simpliﬁcation of the general model that we use in our empirical main analysis,
where we trade all residuals and map them back into the original stock returns.
62

## Page 64

Figure A.4: Example Attention Weights for Sinusoidal Residual Inputs
(a) Input residual and attention head weights for ωsin = 2/30
(b) Input residual and attention head weights for ωsin = 28/30
(c) Input residual and attention head weights for ωsin = 8/30
(d) Input residual and attention head weights for ωsin = 14/30
These plots show the attention head weights of the CNN+Transformer benchmark model for simulated sinusoidal residual
input time series. The inputs are xl = sin(2πωsinl), for various ωsin andl∈{ 0,..., 29}. The right subplot shows the attention
weights for the H = 4 attention heads for the speciﬁc residuals. The empirical benchmark model is the CNN+Transformer
model based on IPCA 5-factor residuals. We estimate the model on only once on the ﬁrst Ttrain=8 years based on the Sharpe
ratio objective.
63

## Page 65

Appendix C. Unconditional Residual Means
Table A.VI: OOS Annualized Performance of Unconditional Average Residuals
Equally Weighted Residuals
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K SR µ σ SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 0.52 11.2% 21.4% 0.52 11.2% 21.4% 0.52 11.2% 21.4%
1 0.39 1.9% 4.8% -0.23 -0.4% 1.5% 0.76 3.2% 4.2%
3 0.18 0.7% 3.7% 0.34 0.3% 0.9% 0.76 2.0% 2.7%
5 0.22 0.8% 3.5% 0.93 0.7% 0.7% 0.63 1.4% 2.3%
8 -0.17 -0.5% 2.9% 1.04 0.6% 0.5% 0.66 1.4% 2.2%
10 - - - 0.90 0.4% 0.5% 0.65 1.3% 2.1%
15 - - - 1.08 0.4% 0.4% 0.62 1.3% 2.0%
This table shows the out-of-sample annualized Sharpe ratio (SR), mean return ( µ), and volatility ( σ) of equally weighted
residuals. We evaluate the out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 2002 to December 2016. The K = 0 factor model
corresponds to directly using stock returns instead of residuals for the signal and trading policy.
Table A.VII: Signiﬁcance of Arbitrage Alphas Based on Unconditional Average Residuals
Equally Weighted Residuals
Fama-French PCA IPCA
K α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ α t α R2 µ t µ
0 1.4% 1.4 97.0% 11.2% 2.0 ∗ 1.4% 1.4 97.0% 11.2% 2.0 ∗ 1.4% 1.4 97.0% 11.2% 2.0 ∗
1 0.4% 0.4 36.6% 1.9% 1.5 0.0% 0.0 25.8% -0.4% -0.9 0.4% 1.1 85.0% 3.2% 2.9 ∗∗
3 0.4% 0.4 9.6% 0.7% 0.7 0.4% 1.9 13.1% 0.3% 1.3 0.9% 3.3∗∗ 84.1% 2.0% 2.9 ∗∗
5 0.2% 0.2 7.0% 0.8% 0.9 0.7% 4.2∗∗∗ 5.9% 0.7% 3.6 ∗∗∗ 0.4% 2.0∗ 89.4% 1.4% 2.4 ∗
8 -0.6% -0.8 0.7% -0.5% -0.7 0.6% 4.5∗∗∗ 4.1% 0.6% 4.0 ∗∗∗ 0.4% 2.1∗ 89.3% 1.4% 2.5 ∗
10 - - - - - 0.5% 3.8∗∗∗ 3.0% 0.4% 3.5 ∗∗∗ 0.3% 1.9 89.4% 1.3% 2.5 ∗
15 - - - - - 0.4% 4.3∗∗∗ 2.0% 0.4% 4.2 ∗∗∗ 0.3% 1.6 89.0% 1.3% 2.4 ∗
This table shows the out-of-sample pricing errors α of cross-sectionally equally weighted residuals relative of the Fama-French
8 factor model and their mean returns µ for the diﬀerent arbitrage models and diﬀerent number of factors K that we use
to obtain the residuals. We run a time-series regression of the out-of-sample returns of the arbitrage strategies on the 8-
factor model (Fama-French 5 factors + momentum + short-term reversal + long-term reversal) and report the annualized α,
accompanying t-statistic value tα, and the R2 of the regression. In addition, we report the annualized mean return µ along
with its accompanying t-statistic tµ. The hypothesis test are two-sided and stars indicate p-values of 5% ( ∗), 1% (∗∗), and
0.1% (∗∗∗). All results use the out-of-sample daily returns from January 2002 to December 2016.
64

## Page 66

Appendix D. Dependency between Arbitrage Strategies
Table A.VIII: Correlations between the Returns of the CNN+Transformer Arbitrage Strategies
Fama-French 3 PCA 3 IPCA 3 Fama-French 5 PCA 5 IPCA 5 PCA 10 IPCA 10
Fama-French 3 1.00 0.32 0.44 0.62 0.25 0.43 0.21 0.44
PCA 3 0.32 1.00 0.32 0.34 0.62 0.35 0.41 0.36
IPCA 3 0.44 0.32 1.00 0.37 0.28 0.81 0.21 0.75
Fama-French 5 0.62 0.34 0.37 1.00 0.28 0.39 0.23 0.40
PCA 5 0.25 0.62 0.28 0.28 1.00 0.29 0.47 0.31
IPCA 5 0.43 0.35 0.81 0.39 0.29 1.00 0.23 0.84
PCA 10 0.21 0.41 0.21 0.23 0.47 0.23 1.00 0.25
IPCA 10 0.44 0.36 0.75 0.40 0.31 0.84 0.25 1.00
This table reports the correlations of our CNN+Transformer strategies for some representative choices of the factor models.
The correlations are calculated with returns of the out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 2002 to December 2016. The
models are calibrated on a rolling window of four years and use the Sharpe ratio objective function. The signals are extracted
from a rolling window of L = 30 days.
Appendix E. Time-Series Signal
In this appendix, we report the OOS returns of strategies using alternative models for the
ablation tests in Section III. For the FFN feedforward network, we use the same architecture,
hyperparameters, optimization settings, etc. as in the Fourier+FFN model utilized throughout the
empirical results section and described in Appendix C.A. For the OU+FFN model, because the
input is the low-dimensional OU signal in R4, we consider a 3 hidden layer with dimensions 4,4,4
regularized with a dropout rate of 0.25. We use the sigmoid activation function, and estimate it
using the same procedure outlined in section B.D, with the same batch size, learning rate, number
of optimization epochs, and optimization method as in Table A.II.
65

## Page 67

Table A.IX: OOS Annualized Performance Based on Sharpe Ratio Objective
Factors Fama-French PCA IPCA
Model K SR µ σ SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 0.50 10.6% 21.3% 0.50 10.6% 21.3% 0.50 10.6% 21.3%
1 0.34 0.8% 2.3% 0.05 0.7% 11.9% 0.60 4.8% 8.0%
OU 3 0.16 0.2% 1.4% 0.44 3.4% 7.8% 0.70 4.6% 6.6%
+ 5 0.17 0.2% 1.2% 0.68 4.7% 7.0% 0.66 4.2% 6.3%
FFN 8 -0.34 -0.3% 1.0% 0.51 3.1% 6.0% 0.60 3.9% 6.2%
10 - - - 0.26 1.3% 5.0% 0.56 3.5% 6.2%
15 - - - 0.31 1.4% 4.3% 0.54 3.3% 6.1%
0 0.57 8.8% 15.3% 0.57 8.8% 15.3% 0.57 8.8% 15.3%
1 0.60 2.0% 3.3% 0.53 6.2% 11.7% 1.07 6.5% 6.1%
3 1.02 2.6% 2.6% 1.15 8.2% 7.2% 1.50 7.6% 5.0%
FFN 5 1.32 2.3% 1.7% 1.42 9.8% 6.9% 1.55 7.3% 4.7%
8 1.31 2.1% 1.6% 1.05 6.4% 6.2% 1.52 7.2% 4.7%
10 - - - 0.70 3.5% 5.0% 1.48 7.0% 4.7%
15 - - - 0.51 2.4% 4.8% 1.68 7.5% 4.5%
This table shows the out-of-sample annualized Sharpe ratio (SR), mean return ( µ), and volatility (σ) of our three statistical
arbitrage models for diﬀerent numbers of risk factors K, that we use to obtain the residuals. We use the daily out-of-
sample residuals from January 1998 to December 2016 and evaluate the out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 2002 to
December 2016. OU+FFN denotes a parametric Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model to extract the signal, but a ﬂexible feedforward
neural network to estimate the allocation function. FFN takes the residuals directly as signals and estimates an allocation
function with a feedforward neural network. The deep learning models are calibrated on a rolling window of four years and
use the Sharpe ratio objective function. The signals are extracted from a rolling window of L = 30 days. The K = 0 factor
model corresponds to directly using stock returns instead of residuals for the signal and trading policy.
Appendix F. Trading Friction Results for PCA Residuals
Table A.X: OOS Performance of CNN+Trans with Trading Frictions
PCA factor model
Sharpe ratio Mean-variance
K SR µ σ SR µ σ
0 0.52 8.5% 16.3% 0.22 2.6% 11.9%
1 0.88 7.3% 8.4% 0.79 9.0% 11.4%
3 0.90 5.7% 6.3% 0.62 4.7% 7.6%
5 0.81 4.5% 5.6% 0.68 4.4% 6.4%
10 -0.08 -0.4% 4.8% -0.08 -0.4% 4.6%
15 -0.87 -3.7% 4.3% -0.96 -3.5% 3.7%
This table shows the out-of-sample annualized Sharpe ratio (SR), mean return (µ), and volatility (σ) for the CNN+Transformer
model with trading frictions on PCA residuals. We use the daily out-of-sample residuals from January 1998 to December
2016 and evaluate the out-of-sample arbitrage trading from January 2002 to December 2016. The models are calibrated
on a rolling window of four years and use either the Sharpe ratio or mean-variance objective function with trading costs
cost(wR
t−1,wR
t−2) = 0.0005∥wR
t−1−wR
t−2∥L1 + 0.0001∥ min(wR
t−1, 0)∥L1. The signals are extracted from a rolling window of
L = 30 days.
66

## Page 68

Appendix G. Portfolio Concentration
Figure A.5: Industry Concentration of Portfolio Weights
This ﬁgure shows the rolling 132-day industry concentration of portfolio weights standardized by the population industry
concentration. The stock portfolio weights wR
t are for the empirical benchmark CNN+Transformer model based on IPCA
5-factor residuals and for the out-of-sample trading period between January 2002 and December 2016. We use standard SIC
industry classiﬁcations.
67

